1
Motriz, Rio Claro, v.24, Issue 4, 2018, e1018106 DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1590/S1980-65742018000400061
Original Article (short paper)
Strategies to teach swimming to people with Spinal Cord Injury (SCI)
Milena Pedro de Morais1 , Graciele Massoli Rodrigues² 
¹Universidade São Judas Tadeu, Sao Paulo, SP , Brazil; ²Universidade São Judas Tadeu, ESEF , Jundiaí, SP , Brazil
Abstract –– Aims: The Swimming has numerous benefits in the physiological, psychological, social and cognitive 
aspects for the person with spinal cord injury. However, the process of learning the swim must be done in order to 
take advantage of the potential and the motor functions of the swimmer, through the planning of actions and teaching strategies that seek an effective swim with the fewest adaptations possible and respecting the specific conditions of the lesion. The objective was to verify how the teacher evaluates the motor function of the swimmer with the SCI and to understand how this instructional process acts in the learning of swimming through the perspective of the 
teacher. Methods: Participated in the research, twelve Physical Education teachers, who work with spinal cord injury 
swimmers. Data were collected through semi-structured interviews and a field diary. Results: The results demonstrated 
that, depending on the teaching style adopted by the teacher, he does not consider the student’s feedback and perception. He acts only on the results and possibilities he sees. Therefore, in the teacher’s view, the adaptability of the swimming 
technique is conditioned to the motor limitation of the individual with SCI, or according to the teacher’s perspective 
on the functionality. Conclusion: We conclude that the use of strategies based on the traditional swimming technique 
showed that there is little awareness or lack of knowledge about the work of promoting the swimmer’s motor function, confirmed to the extent that the contribution of the specific literature is incipient and does not satisfy the teacher’s desire for knowledge.
Keywords: teaching strategies; spinal cord injury; swimming; motor functionality .
Introduction
Multiple aspects related to the psychosocial benefits to people 
with SCI have been discussed by the scholarly literature. Among 
them, one can find mental health, socialization, quality of life, 
heart hypertrophy, maximum oxygen uptake improvement, 
maximum lactate level and pulmonary function. Additionally, there are neurological benefits such as the effect on the activity of the synaptic neuron that facilitates the myelination and the remyelination processes due to the muscle contraction
1,2. This 
occurs because the voluntary motor training demands the right 
conditions of muscle tonus and asks for afferent feedback, which 
is designated by a neuromotor answer of the sensory function3.
People with SCI begin to swim in the clinical rehabilitation 
process, due to the high index of lesions acquired. The sport 
has assumed the auxiliary function in this process, making 
the educational purpose essential. Therefore, the selection of 
adequate strategies during the teaching process mediated by 
the teacher acts to promote the motor function of the swimmer with SCI. This is the assumption for the adaptation process as a medium to encourage various possibilities of movement that 
could contribute to the process of teaching/learning, improving 
the quality of living for people with SCI4.
The success of the activity is due to specific factors in the 
teacher professional practice:  to know the SCI characteristics 
influencing the teaching/learning of the swimming process, 
as per example, the flotation, as people with SCI have high 
floating potential only in the lower limbs, and while they float effortlessly, they often have difficulty to come back to the 
upright position5,6.
In the scholar field there is a lack of strategies for teaching 
swimming to individuals with SCI, therefore it is clear the 
relevance to understanding in-depth the motor skills in the 
teaching/learning process, which is directly linked to the practice 
the teacher uses and to the learning by the pupil as an active 
part in this process.
In this sense, this study aims to verify: How the teacher 
assesses the motor function of the swimmer with SCI, and the perspective of teachers on how the pedagogical process acts in the learning of swimming.
Materials and methods
This is a descriptive exploratory qualitative research7. The 
respondents were twelve teachers of swimming, working for at 
least one year with people with SCI. Teachers of swimmers with 
spinal pathologies without functional involvement in the list 
of mono, di, tri, para and quadriplegia, hemiplegia and paresis 
were excluded from this research. The data collection was done 
through a semi-structured interview, composed of nine themes covering the problems and objectives of the research.
The interviews were pre-scheduled, recorded and transcribed. 
The data were submitted to a content analysis10, as per, and seven 
categories of themes were identified: Swimming (standard and 
for people with SCI), Condition’s overcoming and driving to 
2 Motriz, Rio Claro, v.24, Issue 4, 2018, e1018106
Morais M. P . & Rodrigues G. M.the rehabilitation of the swimmer with SCI, Structure of the 
intervention, Swimming for people with SCI: teaching process, 
adequacy to the needs and strategy, Teacher’s understanding 
of the functionality, Teacher and pupil’s functionality and the 
contribution and support of the professional.
To collect the data, it was also used a field diary consisting 
of a form with the teacher’s personal information and ID, 
description of the focused pupil (time of practice, age, characteristics of the injury), objectives of the class and a specific field for the activities developed, followed by 
questions about the strategies used to teach them. There were eight activities options: Breathing, Dorsal buoyance, Ventral 
buoyance, The transition from dorsal to a ventral position, The 
transition from ventral to a dorsal position, Hip rotation from 
ventral to a dorsal position, Hip rotation from dorsal to a ventral 
position and Arm back/forward rotation. The diary also had a 
space for two other activities conducted by the teacher. All the 
teachers’ notes about the teaching strategies used, monitoring 
the pupils and use of the pedagogical material were submitted 
to the descriptive analysis. 
The research was approved by the Ethics and Research 
Committee of the Universidade São Judas Tadeu under 
number 859.397.
Results
In the Standard Swimming category and for people with 
SCI the differences between the two modalities of swimming 
were discussed. These difficulties are also related to the 
overcoming condition and driving to the rehabilitation of the 
swimmer with SCI, because of his/her/family expectations at the beginning of the swimming learning process, but also 
related to technical and methodological aspects of swimming 
for people with SCI.
This teaching process has different characteristics when 
compared to the regular swimming, as they represent a paradigm 
break, because each person with SCI has his/her pattern of 
swimming, whereas for the regular swimming the preoccupation 
is only with the technical execution of the movement.
 “Family and teacher create expectations about the 
learning of the pupil, for whom is very important to believe that he/she has potential (…)”
Teachers discussed this aspect as it is essential to consider 
both the pupil’s individuality and respect his/her timing to learn. 
The teacher wants to help the pupil in his post-traumatic period, 
facilitating the discovery of his/her potentials and the process of recognition of a new life, the perception of a new body as a factor that promotes a change in the pupil’s mindset regarding what means to be a disabled person. 
 “It is amazing when they discover the movement, 
their functional capacity, it is a transformation 
because they come thinking that they will not get a 
great deal, and then they find out that their bodies can do much more than the movement they do in a wheelchair”.
In the Structure of the Intervention category, classes’ schedule 
and individual attention to the pupil are as important as the 
previous assessment to facilitate the teaching process.
The Swimming for People with SCI category:  the teaching 
process, the suitability to the needs and the strategy highlighted 
that the phase of adaptation to the water is essential to the 
development of the pupil’s perception about the functionality 
of the movement. It has been found that the strategies of teaching 
can occur in many forms and that teachers select them according 
to the level of learning, the pupils’ degree of injury and the vision 
of the teacher on the functionality. This last aspect is crucial 
in order to make an adjustment to their needs and to recognize their potentials.
The teaching process guidance could be oriented either to the 
pupil’s potentials or to the limiting view of the accomplishment 
of tasks. The work of the teacher is to make the needed adaptation 
so that the pupil responds to a particular purpose, restricted and 
specific about the activity to be developed.
Considering the aspects above mentioned, the teaching 
process should value the potentials of the pupil, focusing on 
the skills development and not in the impairment. Adaptations 
and strategies in teaching should be thought as to consider 
the singularities of each student and the feedback given to the teacher, who should devise the teaching strategy with the pupil 
and respect his/her pattern of swimming regarding balance, 
propulsion, drag, and buoyancy.
The process to determine the strategy is linked to the many 
factors inherent to the swimming practice, as the teacher’s 
ability to work with a person with SCI, his assessment on the 
limitation and inability of the pupil to perform determined 
task and the development of a strategy that makes it possible 
to accomplish the task considering the limitations of the 
disability. In fact, it considering the problematic point of start’s 
teaching process because the people with SCI sometimes are 
responsible to adapt their movement.  It was clear that in 
order to recognize the potentials of the pupil with SCI it is 
necessary to make a comparison with the regular swimming and the importance of the teacher as a mediator in the process to discover the functionality.
The item Understanding of the Teacher about the functionality, 
specifically about how much the person with SCI can do, it 
depends on the expectations one has, on the stimulus is given or how much the teacher sees and recognizes the extent of the pupil’s potentials. 
When working with the teacher as a team, the pupil gives 
feedback, and becomes aware of his/her own body and discovers 
and builds the better way to move, and the more efficient way to do it. The functionality was discussed as a set of actions and a shift from the view of the limitation when the pupil discovers his/her potentials.
 “(...) a great part of their lives is out of the swimming 
pool, the move they do in water is different from the 
one they do out of the water and… it is this way; 
3 Motriz, Rio Claro, v.24, Issue 4, 2018, e1018106Strategies to teach swimming to people with SCI
they think that they cannot move the arm or the 
upper body when in the wheelchair, but when they 
make a motor action in the water they perceive a 
functionality of something that before did not have 
a function for them”.
The discovery of the potentials does not occur only in the 
pupil’s vision, it happens in the perception and in the teacher’s 
analysis of the teaching process. Teachers affirmed that the 
autonomy of the pupil is relevant for the discovery of potentials, 
which should be rebuilt because of the disability and need for 
support, the pupil ceases being autonomous and becomes 
dependent on others. The work to discover the potentials begins 
in the planning of the teacher’s instruction, which should make the pupil, feel safe and evolve in the learning.
In Teacher and the Functionality of the Pupil it was 
explicit that the teacher acts according to his/her principles, 
not considering the pupil’s feedback as relevant information 
for the building of the educational activities. In addition, 
this issue is associated with the style of teaching adopted 
by the teacher.
The teacher associates the perception of the functionality 
with the degree of motor involvement of the pupil and considers 
the neurological vision of the function, differentiating between 
the ability to have functionality in complete and incomplete 
injuries, thus associating the functional perception to the 
technical efficiency of the movement in the swimming, and to the perception of sensitivity.
Nevertheless, the functional perception becomes clearer to 
the teacher when the pupil shows motor perception before SCI, 
and he/she guarantees the maximum use of the pupil’s mobility. 
In this case, it is the professor duty to recognize the potentials 
and use strategies that could contribute to the learning and 
development of the functionality.
However, the lack of specific literature related to swimming for 
people with SCI implies that teachers use the documentation for 
conventional swimming, which was pointed out in Professional 
Input and Support.
Data obtained in the field diary allowed us to verify the 
conduction of the teaching process according to the learning 
phase of the pupil and to his/her level of SCI, and how the 
instructional process acts in the learning, being all these factors 
associated to the intended activity and objectives for both teacher 
and pupil.
In respect to the Guidance and Use of Strategies of Teaching, 
as will be described below, it was observed that they are 
differentiated depending upon the action to be done and the 
desired objective, being listed twenty different goals by the 
ten participants. Among the objectives, there are: the pupil 
should complete 100 m backstrokes, physical preparation, 
and conditioning improvement, adaptation to the water and 
introductory course to crawl and backstrokes, development of the techniques of crawl swimming, increase the glaze and the dorsal buoyancy during the double stroke, among others.
For the activity Breathing, the teachers told that they use as 
teaching strategy visual demonstration and oral instruction. In 
dorsal and ventral buoyance, teachers reported to be underwater to help the pupil physically or with a flotation material as an 
auxiliary resource, as well as in the activities of transition from ventral to dorsal position and vice-versa, and in the latter they use balls and the edge of the pool.
In the Conduction and Execution of the Activity, the strategy 
used was to guide pupils to discover the body balance, using 
variations of the balance position added to the concentration of the strength in the muscle contraction in the abdominal region to move with the help of the edge of the pool.
It was noticed that teachers did not use flotation material as 
a facilitator to teach hip rotation in decubitus change, as they 
recurrently use their own body as a physical support to the pupils, 
leading us to understand that the use of the floating material in this movement could not be a facilitator, as it prevents the free 
movement of the pupil in the water, substantiating the teacher’s 
direct assistance. 
For Arm Rotation Backwards and Forward activities, the 
buoy material mentioned was the board and the acqua tub. As 
conduction strategy, besides the demonstration of the movement, 
teachers ask another student to be the model of the movement 
to be done. During all the process of teaching, we identified 
that verbal instruction was primarily used and complemented by other strategies, created or not by the teacher.
Discussion
Teacher’s participation and engagement not only in class but 
in the relation with the life of the learner is the key to promote significant changes and sets the difference between the regular swimming and the one for people with SCI. In this sense, what 
makes the professional working with a disabled person different 
is the construction of actions about himself and the other through 
the challenges of the practice of sports.
The psychosocial well-being is essential to overcome 
challenges, and the practice of sports has a relevant role in this aspect, as the family has high expectations about the success of the actions that could improve the quality of life and the motor potentials of the person injured. About these expectations, it is 
often difficult to deal with technical and methodological aspects 
of swimming for a person with SCI, as there is a swimming 
model socially recognized and it is the regular swimming, with 
four styles and typically associated to a predetermined sequence 
of apprenticeship8.
The man should be seen in his entirety9, as much as an 
individual able to develop and as per his uniqueness. Therefore, it 
is important to consider the pupil’s individuality as independent of 
the context may it be inclusive or not, prioritizing the potentiation 
of the movement, which is characterized by the discovering of 
the functionality and the total use of the residual potential, being 
the teaching strategies the main point for adequacy to the needs 
and the recognition of the pupil’s possibilities11. 
The target of the teaching process could be directed to the 
pupil’s potentials or to the limiting accomplishment of tasks, 
and the teacher must make the necessary adaptations so that 
the pupil answers to a specific purpose related to the activity 
to be developed.
4 Motriz, Rio Claro, v.24, Issue 4, 2018, e1018106
Morais M. P . & Rodrigues G. M.Despite the disability, the activity to be done and the 
environment are important factors to be considered in the 
teaching process, the focus should be the development of skills12. 
The emphasis should be in the building of a positive attitude of 
the professional and in the demystification of the impairment, 
critical aspects in a teaching program specific to the adapted 
physical activity13. Those health professionals should maintain 
the focus in the attendance of the person with SCI, developing 
the maximum potential for the health and functions through the 
swimming. That it is essential to consider the motor functionality 
of the person with SCI, as it will define the social and cultural expectations about life
14. 
It can be stated in the view11, 14 about the valuation of the 
potentials of the pupil and the emphasis in the building of 
a teaching process that leads to the skills development.  In 
contrast15, “it is important that the teacher has full knowledge 
of lost or damaged functions of each pupil so that he can define specific objectives”. In this vision, the teaching focus is in the limitation of movements in consequence of the disability, thus prioritizing the spinal cord injury, disregarding the individual’s potentials. 
From the perspective of the pupil’s potentials, the necessary 
adaptations and strategies to be used are considered according 
to the specificities of each pupil, and the feedback to the teacher 
should be assessed during the activities14, the teacher should 
plan with the pupil which strategy of teaching will be more 
comfortable for the development of the activities.
Thus, the process to determine the strategy is linked to the 
various factors inherent to the swimming practice, i.e., the 
teacher’s skill to work with a person with SCI, his analysis 
about the pupil’s limitations and disability for a determined 
task and the setting of a strategy to perform a task considering the boundaries of the disability.
The responsibility of the teacher is to promote the learning 
according to his vision about the functionality and to use proper 
strategies of teaching, the ones that could foster the needed 
stimulation. The focus should be on the teaching program (curriculum, content, strategies, procedures, materials and 
resources, places and environment of the intervention, assessment 
and learning methods) and not only about the disability15.
This question is related to the teaching style that could be by 
orders, by tasks, by guided discovery or by the problem-solving 
approach. In this way, the style adopted interferes directly with 
the pupil’s learning, in the case that the style does not fit the 
needs shown16.
Thus, the teacher has to guarantee maximum achievement 
of the pupil’s mobility, to recognize his/her potentials and to 
use strategies that could contribute to the learning and to the 
development of the functionality. We observed a discontinuity 
in the teacher’s discourse about the view and interpretation 
they build about the functionality when their pupils move. 
That discontinuity brings them near the “sportivization” of the movement (adding elements that are intrinsic to conventional 
sports, like competitivity and performance) following the 
knowledge recently produced. So, while the sports approach for 
teaching swimming technically answers to the questions of the 
sportivization of the pedagogical practice without preoccupation with the teacher’s instruction and feedback as regards to the 
adaptability of the pupil in the triad body, environment, and 
task, this sports approach will continue to prevail and excluding 
those who do not “fit” in the shape of the practice17.
Conclusion
It was observed that depending on the teacher’s style of 
teaching, the feedback of the pupil and the possibilities that 
it can open are not considered. This disregard means that in 
the perspective of the teacher about the swimming technique, 
the adaptability is conditioned to the motor limitation of 
the individual with SCI or to the teacher’s vision about the 
functionality as a set of factors.
It becomes clear that to recognize or not the potentials of 
the individual with SCI interferes directly in the efficiency of the teaching process and the teacher’s practice in a manner that 
from the moment in which this recognition occurs, a wide range 
of options and teaching strategies are feasible.
As far as the teaching strategies, the use of procedures 
based on the traditional technique of swimming showed that 
there is low sensitization or even lack of knowledge about the 
work of promoting the motor function of the swimmer. The 
latter is confirmed by the scarcity of literature about the theme, which does not satisfy the teacher’s desire for knowledge. It is 
important to highlight that the discussion was guided by the 
view of functionality provided by the potentials of individuals with SCI, and how much and in which form it is related to the neurologic aspect of the function.
References
1.  Sadowski CL, Mcdonald JW. Activity-based restorative therapies: 
concepts and applications in spinal cord injury-related neuroreha -
bilitation. Dev Disabil Res Rev. 2009;15(2):112-615: doi: 10.1002/
ddrr.61.
2. Buchholz AC, Martin Ginis KA, Bray SR, Craven BC, Hicks AL, 
Hayes KC, et al. Greater daily leisure time physical activity is 
associated with lower chronic disease risk in adults with spinal 
cord injury. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab. 2009;Aug;34(4):640-7; 
doi: 10.1139/H09-050.
3. Franz M, Richner L, Wirz M, von Reumont A, Bergner U, Herzog 
T, et al. Physical therapy is targeted and adjusted over time for 
the rehabilitation of locomotor function in acute spinal cord in-
jury interventions in physical and sports therapy. Spinal Cord. 
2018;Feb;56(2):158-167.doi.org/10.1038/s41393-017-0007-5.
4. Sale P, Mazzarella F, Pagliacci MC, Aito S, Agosti M, Franceschini 
M. Sport, free time and hobbies in people with spinal cord injury. 
Spinal Cord. 2012;Jun;50(6):452-6. doi: 10.1038/sc.2011.
5. Giraldo AED, Picareli, C, Souza EC, Iasi, TCP. Atividades aquáticas 
adaptadas. ADAPTA. 2010;1(6): 72-73.
6. Vitor A, Elzo J, Cecarelli L, Barbanera P. Atividades aquáticas 
adaptadas. ADAPTA. 2010; 1(6): 72-73.
7. Thomas, JR, Nelson, J. K. Métodos de pesquisa em atividade física. 
Ed ArtMed, Porto Alegre, 2002. 
5 Motriz, Rio Claro, v.24, Issue 4, 2018, e1018106Strategies to teach swimming to people with SCI
8. Bardin L. Análise de conteúdo. Edições 70, Lisboa, 2011.
9. Precin P. Influência dos fatores psicossociais na reabilitação. In: 
Fisioterapia: Avaliação e Treinamento. Ed. Manole, Barueri; 2010. 
p. 27-69.
10. Pedrinelli VJ, Verenguer RC. Educação Física Adaptada: introdução 
ao universo das possibilidades. In: Atividade Física Adaptada: 
Qualidade de vida para pessoas com necessidades especiais. Ed. 
Manole, Barueri, SP; 2008. p. 148-181.
11. Greguol M. Natação Adaptada em busca do movimento com au-tonomia. Ed. Manole, Barueri, São Paulo, 2010.
12. Emes C, Longmuir P, Downs P. An Abilities-Based Approach to 
Service Delivery and Professional Preparation in Adapted Physical 
Activity. Adapt Phys Activ Q. 2002;19(4):403- 419. doi: 10.1123/apaq.19.4.403.
13. 
Giesecke C. Aquatic Rehabilitation of Clients with Spinal Cord 
Injury. In: Aquatic Rehabilitation. Ed. Lippincott, New York, USA; 
1997. p.127-150. 
14. Guccione AA, Scalzitti DA. Avaliação do estado funcional e do 
nível de atividade. In: Fisioterapia: Avaliação e Treinamento. Ed. 
Manole, Barueri; 2010. p. 404-425.
15. Gorgatti MG, Bohme MTS. Atividade Física e a Lesão Medular. 
In: Atividade Física Adaptada: Qualidade de vida para pessoas 
com necessidades especiais. Ed Manole, Barueri, São Paulo, 2008.16. Munster MA V; Almeida J.J.G. Um olhar sobre a Inclusão de pessoas 
com Deficiência em Programas de Atividade Motora: do espelho ao 
caleidoscópio. In:Atividade motora adaptada: a alegria do corpo. 
Artes Médicas, São Paulo, 2006. p. 81-91.
17. Melo A. C. R. Descrição da Aptidão inicial para natação em lesados 
medulares. Rev Bras Med Esporte. 2009;6(15):441- 445.
Corresponding author
Milena Pedro de Morais
Rua Jaci, 45. Balneário Tupi – Itanhaém, São Paulo, Brasil, 
CEP 11740-000
E-mail: milena.educacaofisica@gmail.com 
Manuscript received on June 6, 2018  
Manuscript accepted on August 22, 2018
Motriz. The Journal of Physical Education. UNESP. Rio Claro, SP, Brazil
- eISSN: 1980-6574 – under a license Creative Commons - Version 3.0
