Šitić K. aŶd DuŵaŶić D.: Topological ƌegioŶs aŶd fƌeƋueŶcy of paiŶ iŶ youŶg…                Acta Kinesiologica 10 (2016 ) 1: 29- 32 
 29  
TOPOLOGICAL REGIONS AND FREQUENCY OF PAIN IN YOUNG SWIMMERS 
 
Karla Šitić and Duje Dumanić  
 
Faculty of Kinesiology, University of Split, Republic of Croati a 
 
 
Original scientific paper 
 
Abstract 
The main objective of this study was to identify the frequency  and topology pain in 45 young swimmers; and 
cadets (N = 25, mean age = 12.56) and junior (N = 20, mean age = 16 .00). All swimmers filled the modified 
SEFIP questionnaire. They had to mark (for any given part of the bod y), a prominent pain and intensity of 
the same. T-test and Bartlett's test were used for data analysis. The results of this research led to the 
conclusion that cadets often feel pain in the shoulder, u pper and lower back and knee, while juniors also had 
pain in the shoulder and lower back, but also in the neck, knee  and Journal. We can assume that these 
results are obtained due to a greater training load in the junio r age (no matter whether it is a larger number 
of training units or on the intensity of training). It can b e recommended during the training process to pay 
more attention to warm-up and stretching (before and after the appli ed training). 
 
Key words:   young swimmers, injury, SEFIP questionnaire, chi-square test 
Introduction 
 
Health is important at all stages of life, especially in 
sports. Physical preparation functional level of 
swimmers is directly dependent on the health 
status, such as the realization of the planned 
training depends on the health level swimmers 
(Volčanšek, 2002).  Swimmers usually start training 
at an early stage, before it has matured their 
musculoskeletal system. There is a potential risk of 
injury if the progress of the young swimmers too 
rapid or if it is not systematically monitored. 
Overuse syndrome is the name for a common 
mechanism of injury in young swimmers who is 
prone to problems with the shoulder (rotator cuff 
muscles), lower back and knee joint. Sports doctors 
identify these specific disorders as swimmer's 
shoulder, syndrome of back pain caused by a 
butterfly style, and chest knee. Coaches not only 
play an important role in identifying early indicators 
of these injuries, but can also help in the 
prevention of the way to control the volume of 
training load, the mechanics of the stroke, then 
training with weights or other sport and training 
programs on land (Stager, Tanner, 2005). To 
prevent injury, it is important to first analyze the 
persistent problem. For the analysis of this sport we 
have to know the past, the current situation in 
swimming, as well as to how it will develop 
swimming in the future (Colwin, 1993). Due to the 
large number of detected injuries in young 
swimmers, it is necessary to understand the 
legality underdeveloped musculoskeletal system. 
Skeleton of man represents the skeleton which is 
connected to the soft tissue (muscles, tendons and 
ligaments). During Preadolescent, bony skeleton is 
subject to rapid growth, a factor particularly 
important for the possibility of injury. Sports 
injuries are globally classified according to their 
pathogenesis. So there are those caused by acute 
trauma and those that are the result of small, repeated stress or "overuse". The latter represents 
the most significant injuries in swimming. Their 
early identification and active management will 
reduce the possibility for chronic incompetence in 
addressing the intermittent training (Stager, 
Tanner, 2005). It is important to distinguish from 
injury. The main feature of the injury is acute 
occurrence. Damage is still a chronic character.  
 
Impairment is considered the pathological-
anatomical substrate that anamnesis can prove a 
professional athlete or amateur usually not felt, or 
cannot remember the time when the damage 
occurs (Mišković, 2011). Damage is usually the 
result of a series of consecutive microtrauma 
(Pećina, 1992).  In some studies, according to the 
Frisch et al., (2009), mentions certain chronic 
injuries associated with children and adolescents. 
Taking into account the upper extremities, major 
injuries overuse injuries related to shoulder pain, 
rotator cuff tendinopathy and elbow. Taking all 
these facts into account, it is clear that special 
attention should be given to work with beginners, 
ie. With children the prevention of all injuries 
should be borne in mind. This would mean to 
remove their risk and cause. It is therefore of great 
importance ability to obtain reliable feedback on 
the occurrence of pain (topological region and 
intensity) in young athletes. As an effective and 
very simple way of gathering information on the 
occurrence of pain, questionnaires were tested in 
measurement characteristics.  
 
This and SEFIP (Self-Estimated Functional Inability 
because of Pain), which has been used on a sample 
of dancers (Miletić et al., 2009; Miletić et al., 
2011), volleyball players (Stanović et al., 2015) as 
well as volleyball and handball (Magzan et al., 
2015) used in this study. 
Šitić K. aŶd DuŵaŶić D.: Topological ƌegioŶs aŶd fƌeƋueŶcy of paiŶ iŶ youŶg…                Acta Kinesiologica 10 (2016 ) 1: 29- 32 
 30 Objecti ve 
Because of this, there is the main objective of this 
research; determine the topology of pain in 
swimmers cadets and juniors.  
 
We also aim to determine whether there are 
statistically significant differences in the incidence 
of pain between the two groups tested swimmers. 
 
Methods 
 
The sample in this study consisted of a total of 45 
swimmers (25 cadets and 20 junior) from 3 
swimming club from Split (PK "Grdelin" PK "Sailor" 
and PK "Jadran"). All participants completed a 
questionnaire modified SEFIP.  
 
The respondents for each of the 15 parts of the 
body (neck, shoulder, elbow, wrist, fingers on the 
hand, upper back, lower back, hips, thighs front 
upper leg back, knee, lower leg front, back lower 
leg, ankle and foot ) mark about the pain in a 
certain part of that level of pain (to the left and to 
the right).  
 
The incidence is assessed offered answers to Likert 
scale according to the following numbers: 0 - do 
not hurt me; 1 - a little pain; 2 - quite hurts, but I 
practice; 3 - very bad, so I avoid certain 
movements; 4 - I cannot even train because of the 
pain. Topology pain evaluate the scale - "there is 
pain", or, "no pain" (marked with 0 or 1) in a 
particular region of the body.  
 
T-test for independent samples we examined the 
significance of differences between the cadets and 
junior swimmers due to their age, body height, 
weight, years of training and weekly hours of 
training. Chi-square test analyzed the significance 
of differences in the frequency of pain in certain 
parts of the body between the cadets and junior 
swimmers. 
 
Results and discussion 
 
Table 1 shows the basic features of swimmers 
junior and cadets involved in the study and 
significance of differences (p) of the same. 
 
Table 1. Basic features of junior and cadet 
swimmers 
 
 
After an examination of Table 1, we can conclude 
that among the respondents swimmers junior and 
cadets are no statistically significant differences in 
age, body height, body weight and years of training, but not in the number of hours of training 
per week. Given the fact that the swimmers juniors 
significantly taller and heavier and significantly 
longer training of cadets, when interpreting the 
results we must accept this fact. Table 2 shows the 
topology of the pain and the significance of 
differences in the incidence of pain between two 
selected groups of young swimmers. 
 
Table 2. Topology of pain and significance of 
differences in the incidence of pain 
 
 
 
Looking at Table 2, we can conclude that the most 
common sites of pain in swimmers cadets: shoulder 
(48%), upper (36%) and lower back (32%) and 
knee (52%). Since training with cadets are not yet 
so intense, we can assume that the occurrences 
shoulder pain a result of frequent movement, 
taking into account the fact that the shoulder and 
rotator cuff rim vulnerable to frequent stimuli. So 
Cave (2001) in his work gives an example swimmer 
only during a workout done about 4000 strokes, 
which amounts to more than 800,000 strokes in a 
single season (so it is not surprising that about 
60% of top swimmers have problems in terms of 
overuse injuries in the shoulder area). Pain in the 
back and knees in turn may be the result of growth 
and development, or non-specific training. Some 
authors (Cave, 2001, Đapić et al., 2001) indicate 
that the minimum anatomical variations and some 
biomechanical abnormalities of the lower 
extremities, especially if they are associated with 
errors in training and/or other external 
predisposing factors, resulting in the formation of 
overuse injuries to the lower extremity and / or 
spine. There are also studies (Becker, 1986) 
indicating the occurrence of structural scoliosis in 
young swimmers Delfinas, and which occur with 
repeated flexion of the spine, as well as due to 
muscle imbalance front and back muscle groups. 

Šitić K. aŶd DuŵaŶić D.: Topological ƌegioŶs aŶd fƌeƋueŶcy of paiŶ iŶ youŶg…                Acta Kinesiologica 10 (2016 ) 1: 29- 32 
 31 Furthermore, knee pain may be associated with 
chest technique, which produces because of the 
position of the joint. It is believed that the cause of 
the symptoms enthesitis median collateral ligament 
on the medial epicondyle of the femur perch, and 
often occurs bilaterally (Cave, Bojanić, Hašpl, 
2001). Unlike cadets, juniors most often felt pain in 
the neck (45%), shoulder (40%, which is less than 
the cadets), slightly more in the lower back (70%), 
and in the knee and the list (40%) . These 
percentages are expected due to the long and 
intense workouts, but reported pain in the lower 
back is not negligible. From Table 1 it is evident 
that there is a sudden increase in the training load 
as far as the weekly number of hours of training, 
but it can be assumed that these hours of training 
increased due to additional training on land 
(weightlifting, running, jumping, etc.). Shoulder 
pain can also be attributed to the overuse 
syndrome, which is the sport of this kind inevitably 
(a large number of repetitions of the same 
movement).  
 
Furthermore, this syndrome can be attributed to 
the pain in the neck. The logical explanation for this 
phenomenon would be a specific breathing in 
swimming, with the head frequently rotated 
sideways at crawl technique, which can cause the 
same. Also, when used with the butterfly head to 
the inspiratory lifted up and forward, which creates 
additional stress on the neck muscles. The cause of 
pain in the lower back and knee would be the same 
as in swimmers cadets, while the pain in the list 
probably occurs due to shortened muscles that 
often cause spasm, but due to lack of time devoted 
to stretching. Table 2 also shows the significance of 
differences in the incidence of pain between the two 
groups of respondents. There are significant 
differences in pain wrist, back of the thigh and 
knee, and hock, but due to soreness at these 
places is not frequent onset, in a group of 
swimmers, we will not to dwell on it. We will 
mention only the fact that these phenomena are 
common in football players, basketball players, 
runners and other young athletes who are engaged 
in similar sports, according to the Frisch et al; 
2009, and that in such sports can lead to repetitive 
microtrauma. Conclusion 
 
Looking at the results of swimmers cadets, we can 
emphasize the biggest amount of pain in the 
shoulders, upper and lower back, and knees. When 
junior is also present shoulder pain, lower back and 
knee, but in addition we find the occurrence of pain 
in the neck and Journal. Clearly, the more intense 
and exhausting training in junior age affect the 
difference in the frequency of pain in certain 
topological regions of the body. However, certain 
preventive methods and systematic and 
programmed training load should be to contribute 
to the reduction of these problems in the youth, 
especially in the cadet age. In doing so, we must 
not ignore the standardized methods to assess 
damage and the cause of the existence of overuse 
injuries because they can be very helpful 
professional staff, as well as the athletes 
themselves. This means recognizing the first signs 
of damage to the musculoskeletal system, to which 
most often occurs as a result of overtraining. It is 
essential to stop such state in the beginning . 
Children are not "little people" and have unique 
scalability and differ from adults to structures that 
allow growth and development, such as the growth 
plate, the epiphysis and apophysis on these 
sensitive cartilaginous structures usually appear 
overuse syndromes (Đapić  et al., 2001). The 
implementation of stretching and strengthening the 
muscles in training is neccessary. Special attention 
should be given to the mobility increase and 
stability of the shoulder, and spine.  You should 
also find time for stretching and relaxing muscles 
(particularly those of the rear loggia; and to list). It 
is necessary to avoid sudden increase in the 
intensity of training without a good level of 
acquired swimming technique, because as such can 
lead to injury. In conclusion, regular reviews and 
opinions, and filling out the questionnaire as SEFIP 
and other similar, in order to have a more efficient 
implementation of prevention program. In this 
regard, an important role is played by the trainers 
themselves. Maximize the potential of young 
athletes in the sports performance integration of a 
number of factors, of which we cannot ignore the 
diagnosis. 
 
 
References 
 
Becker, T.J. (1986). Scoliosis in swimmers. Clin.Sport.Med , 5(1), 193-246. 
Colwin, C.M. (1993). Swimming into the 21st century. Human Kinetics . 
Đapić, T., Antičević, D.,  & Ćapin, T. (2001). Sindromi prenaprezanja u djece i adolescenata.  [Overuse injuries 
in children and adolescents. In Croatian.]. Department of Orthopaedic Su rgery, University of Zagreb, KBC 
Zagreb. 
Magzan, K., Grgantov, Z., Gelo, M., & Pavlović, Lj. (2015). Učestalost i topologija boli kod mladih o dbojkašica 
i rukometašica.  [The frequency and topology of pain in young female volle yball and handball players. In 
Croatian.]. Proceedings ; 5th International Scientific Conference "Contemporary Kinesiolog y". Dalmatina 
printing, Split, Faculty of Kinesiology, University of Spli t. 
Miletić, A., Kostić, R., & Miletić, Đ. (2011). Pain Prevalence Among Competiti ve International Dancers. 
International journal of Athletic Therapy & Training , 16(1), 13- 16. 
Miletić, A., Kostić, R., Božanić, A., & Miletić, Đ. (2009). Pain Status Monitoring in Adolescent Dancers. Medical 
problems of performing artists , 24(7), 119124. 
Šitić K. aŶd DuŵaŶić D.: Topological ƌegioŶs aŶd fƌeƋueŶcy of paiŶ iŶ youŶg…                Acta Kinesiologica 10 (2016 ) 1: 29- 32 
 32 Pećina, M. (1992). Sindromi prenaprezanja sustava za kretanje. [Overuse injuries of the locomo tor system . 
In Croatian.]. Zagreb : Globus . 
Pećina, M. (2001). Overuse injuries of the musculoskeletal system. Arh.Hig.Rada.Toksikol. , 52, 383-392.  
Pećina, M., Bojanić, I., & Hašpl, M. (2001). Sindrom prenaprezanja u području koljena . [Overstrain syndrome 
in the knee region.].  Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Zagreb, KBC Zagreb.  
Arh.Hig.Rada.Toksikol. 52, 429-439. 
Stager, J.M. & Tanner, D.A., (2005). Handbook of Sports Medicine and Science, Swimming, 2nd Edition. 
Department of Kinesiology, Indiana University. 
Stanović, N., Grgantov, Z., Agić, J., & Gilić, B. (2015). Učestalost i topologija boli kod mladih odbo jkašica.  
[The frequency and topology pain in young volleyball playe rs. In Croatian.]. Proceedings; 5th 
International Scientific Conference "Contemporary Kinesiology" . Dalmatina printing, Split, Faculty of 
Kinesiology, University of Split. 
Volčanšek, B. (2002). Bit pliva nja. [Essence of swimming. In Croatian.]. Textbooks of University of Zagreb . 
 
 
TOPOLOŠKE REGIJE I UČESTALOST BOLI KOD MLADIH PLIVAČA  
 
Sažetak  
Glavni cilj ovog istraživanja bio je identificirati učestalost i top ologiju boli kod 45 mladih plivača; i to 
kadeta(N = 25, prosječna dob = 12,56) i juniora (N = 20, prosječna dob =  16,00). Svi plivači ispunili su 
modificirani SEFIP upitnik. Morali su označiti (za svaki zadani dio ti jela) zapaženu bol i intenzitet iste. Za 
analizu podataka korišteni su T -test i Bartlett- ov test. Rezultati ovog istraživanja doveli su do zaključka da 
kadeti često osjećaju bol u ramenu, gornjem i donjem dijelu leđa i kolje nu, dok su juniori također osjećali bol 
u ramenu i donjem dijelu leđa, ali i u vratu, koljenu i listu. M ožemo pre tpostaviti da su ovi rezultati dobiveni 
zbog većeg trenažnog opterećenja u juniorskoj dobi (nebitno radi li se o v ećem broju trenažnih jedinica ili o 
intenzitetu treninga). Može se preporučiti tijekom trenažnog procesa o bratiti više pozornosti na zagrijava nje i 
istezanje (prije i nakon apliciranog treninga). 
 
Ključne riječi:  Mladi plivači, ozljede, SEFIP upitnik, Hi -kvadrat test 
 
 
 
Received: March 02, 2016  
Accepted: June 15, 2016  
Correspondence to:  
Karla Šitić  
University of Split  
Faculty of Kinesiology  
Split, Croatia  
Tel: 021 302 440  
e-mail: grdelin@grdelin.hr 
