Effects of an Aquatic Therapy
Swimming Program on Adults
with Spinal Cord Injuries
Ellen Broach, Diane Groff and John Dattilo
The majority of research examining the effects of participation in physical activity for
individuals with disabilities supports the belief that physical and psychological benefits
exist (Jackson & Davis, 1983; & Smith, 1992). However, many individuals with physical
disabilities find it difficult to achieve aerobic fitness in land-based activity (Smith, 1992).
An aquatic therapy (AT) program incorporating a leisure skill such as swimming may
provide the person with a realistic and enjoyable alternative for achieving rehabilitation.
Few studies have examined the efficacy of an AT program using swimming with adults
who have spinal cord injury. Therefore, a single-subject, multiple baseline design was used
with four adult volunteers with spinal cord injuries (ages 30 to 63) to determine the effects
of swimming on physical condition. A single subject design can be an effective tool for
clinical evaluation because it allows each individual to serve as his or her own control.
Direct observations were used to assess endurance in swimming and forced vital capacity.
The intervention consisted of an AT class (3 X week, 1 hour) using swimming instruction
as a medium of therapy. For each participant, the dependent measure scores were calculated
and plotted on a graph. Body fat tests and social validity interviews occurred the first day
of baseline and at follow-up as secondary measures. While no changes were observed in
Ellen Broach and Diane Grojf are doctoral candidates and John Dattilo is a Professor in
the Department of Recreation and Leisure Studies at the University of Georgia.
The authors would like to thank the participants as well as Judy Askins, Stacy Green,
and Melissa Stratton of the Shepherd Center in Atlanta, Georgia for their assistance and
support in the organization of this project. This research was conducted in part through
funds provided by the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Special Education,
Preparation of Leadership Personnel, Project #HO29D30051 titled ' 'Doctoral Level
Training for Therapeutic Recreation Specialists.''
160 Therapeutic Recreation Journal
vital capacity, a positive relationship between the AT program and cardiovascular endurance
was replicated across all participants and was supported by a decrease in body fat scores.
Social validity interviews revealed that participants perceived improved fitness, enjoyed
their participation, and reported a desire to continue swimming.
KEY WORDS: Aquatic Therapy, Cardiovascular Endurance Swimming, Spinal Cord In-
jury, Therapeutic Recreation, Vital Capacity
Approximately 9,000 people acquire spi-
nal cord injuries (SCI) in the United States
every year (National SCI Statistical Center,
1995). Of those injured, approximately 75%
will be men between the ages of 16 and 30
(National SCI Statistical Center, 1995). The
post-injury employment outlook for individ-
uals with SCI's suggests that less than 40%
of individuals with paraplegia and 25% of
individuals with quadriplegia will return to
work (National SCI Statistical Center, 1995).
Therefore, not only must individuals with
SCI's psychologically and physically cope
with a newly acquired disability, they must
adjust to increased free time. Krause and
Kjorsvig (1992) concluded that regardless of
level of injury, individuals who remain phys-
ically active after sustaining a SCI are better
adjusted, more satisfied with life, and sub-
stantially increase their life expectancy.
Given this relationship, and the fact that
medical advances have steadily increased the
average life expectancy of individuals with
SCI's (DeVivo, 1990; National SCI Statisti-
cal Center, 1995), community-based pro-
grams and services designed to reduce sec-
ondary complications and promote the inde-
pendence and health of individuals with
SCI's have become increasingly important
(Frieden, 1990; Lee, Brock, Dattilo, &
Kleiber, 1993). Coyle, Shank, Kinney and
Hutchins (1993) suggested that leisure inter-
ventions designed to promote independence
and health are an excellent way to enhance
the quality of life of individuals with SCI's.
Research has demonstrated that individu-
als with physical disabilities receive numer-
ous benefits from participation in physically
active recreation experiences (Coyle, Shank,Kinney, & Hutchins, 1993; Jackson & Davis,
1983). The benefits of participation in physi-
cal activities include improved cardiovascu-
lar fitness, flexibility, weight control, muscu-
lar strength, and endurance (Dishman, 1994).
The psychological benefits include de-
creased depression, increased perceived con-
trol, mastery, competence, empowerment,
self-esteem, and overall feelings of well-be-
ing (D'Urso & Logue, 1988). Individuals
with physical disabilities may experience
positive social integration and increased ac-
ceptance from others without disabilities
through participation in physical activity
(Hedrick, 1982, 1986; Williams, 1995).
However, not all physical activity is capable
of producing these benefits for individuals
with disabilities. Because of physical limita-
tions, many individuals with physical disa-
bilities are unable to independently achieve
cardiovascular fitness in land-based activity
(Campion, 1990; Cooper, 1982). Some of
these limitations may be offset in aquatic
related activities.
Hurley and Turner (1991) suggested that
for many individuals with disabilities the
buoyancy, increased resistance and warmth
of the water create an environment that is
more conducive to achieving treatment goals
than some land-based exercises. Physical ef-
fects of activity in the water may include
improved pulmonary functioning, strength,
range of motion, circulation, balance and co-
ordination, and decreased spasticity (Garvey,
1991). Psychological benefits of AT include
improved mood, enhanced self-esteem, body
image, and decreased anxiety and depression
(Benedict & Freeman, 1993; Berger &
Owen, 1992).
Third Quarter 1997 161
In addition to physical and psychological
benefits, successful experiences during AT
may promote the development of swimming
skills or other water activities as lifetime lei-
sure pursuits (Broach & Dattilo, 1996; Cam-
pion, 1990). Specifically, activity which
matches an individual's level of perceived
competence with his or her perceptions of
challenge associated with that activity has
the potential to result in positive experiences.
The psychological state achieved during
these experiences, commonly referred to as
"flow," is characterized by the individual
exerting a more concentrated, focused effort
which results in increased enjoyment and a
desire to continue to participate in the activ-
ity (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990) leading to ac-
tivity adherence. An AT program incorporat-
ing a leisure pursuit such as swimming may
provide participants with a realistic alterna-
tive for maintaining and enhancing physical
fitness, while contributing to their enjoyment
because participants are developing a poten-
tially life long recreation activity that can be
enjoyed with other people (Broach & Dat-
tilo, 1996; Campion, 1990). Therefore,
aquatic therapy (AT) utilizing swimming
and/or exercise activity to improve function
is a viable intervention for individuals with
SCFs (Broach & Dattilo, 1996; Garvey,
1991).
Regardless of the potential benefits of
AT, these authors could not find any empiri-
cally based studies which examined the ef-
fects of AT on individuals with SCI's. There-
fore, this study was designed to measure the
efficacy of an AT program using swimming
on the cardiovascular endurance and vital
capacity of individuals with SCI.
Methods
Participants
The participants in the study were Joe,
Mary, Paul, and Rick, each of whom had a
spinal cord related disability from injury or
illness and used a wheelchair for mobility.
Participants responded to notices containinga description of the study and the name and
phone number of the first author that were
posted in the rehabilitation center where the
study was conducted. Participants registered
for the AT program at the rehabilitation cen-
ter, obtained physician's permission to par-
ticipate, and completed required registration
forms. The required registration forms in-
cluded: (a) Health History, (b) Aquatic Pro-
gram Application and Release, (c) Consent
to be Photographed, and (d) Research Con-
sent Form. An in-depth interview designed
to obtain the individual's personal history,
leisure profile, and perceived physical be-
havior was conducted with each participant
on the first day of baseline. None of the parti-
cipants had ever engaged in an AT program
that focused on swimming, or utilized swim-
ming as a form of exercise for at least 7
months prior to the intervention.
Joe. Joe was a 63 year old Caucasian man
who experienced a spinal stroke two years
before this study which resulted in a T-7
SCI. He is married, has two children and
owns a consulting business. Joe stated that
prior to the AT program, he exercised in the
pool but did not swim laps, and lifted
weights two times per week. In his free time,
Joe stated that he watches two to three hours
of television per day, enjoys spectator sports,
driving and playing computer games. He
stated that he has a swimming pool at home,
but that he could not use it because he was
not able to exit the pool independently. Re-
garding his current activity level and endur-
ance he stated:
I'm bored. I've been considerably less
active since my injury. Let's put it this
way, if I tried to roll this chair for a
mile I would be pretty pooped. I have
a little problem getting in the car. . . .
I can take care of myself, shower and
stuff. Do I get tired? Yeah, I get tired
of being in the chair and sitting all the
time. I need to get out and stretch.
162 Therapeutic Recreation Journal
Joe stated that "I haven't learned much else
but the computer" since his injury.
Mary. Mary was a 29 year old Caucasian
woman who has a T-10 SCI from contracting
transverse mylitis at the age of 9. Mary is
employed part-time at a rehabilitation facil-
ity. She reported that her motivation to par-
ticipate in AT stemmed from her desire to
increase her physical activity and overcome
a fear of swimming in a prone position. Rela-
tive to her motives to participate in AT Mary
stated:
I want to be more physical. I have a
lot of spacticity, and my legs are tight,
tight, tight. That inhibits me some-
time. This is why I was excited when
I saw the flyer. I felt this is what I
needed to get me going. ... I became
afraid to swim on my stomach after I
became paralyzed. ... I decided to
teach myself how to swim last year
but I wasn't very productive.
Mary has a bachelors degree in fine arts and
plans to continue her education in interpre-
tive studies. She stated that during her free
time she enjoys cooking, reading and camp-
ing. Mary noted that time and fear of failure
are primary factors that inhibit her from be-
ing more active, "If I can't do it just right,
I just won't do it."
Paul. Paul was a 35 year old Caucasian
man who sustained a T-6 level SCI six years
ago. He is divorced and maintains dual cus-
tody of two children whom he cares for every
other weekend. Paul works 68-80 hours per
week as a computer programmer and stated
that his work prevents him from being more
physically active. However, he tries to lift
weights 2-3 times per week and enjoys the
outdoors. Paul suggested that his free time
is influenced by his social disposition and
he considers himself a "hermit:" "I avoid
social situations. I spend time with my kids.
We go out and play and do stuff together."
Prior to his injury, Paul spent much of histime in outdoor activity as indicated by his
statements:
I was a hiker-backpacker type person
and then I got married and I sorta got
out of it because she was not inter-
ested. But I started returning to back-
packing before the injury. I now like
to look at stars so I do the telescope
thing some.
In regards to the aspects of his current leisure
lifestyle that he would like to change, Paul
stated that:
I probably need to quit drinking. Uh,
I guess that is about all I would
change. Not that I am an alcoholic.
Well, I would also like to be stronger.
I am better, but it is not as much as I
want. About a 5 on a scale of 1 to 10
(in strength) and I am definitely short
on stamina.
Rick. Rick was a 34 year old African
American man who sustained a T-12/L-1
SCI 14 years ago. Rick is unemployed and
engaged to be married. He stated that he ex-
ercises at home 3 days per week. He enjoys
staying active in his church, reading, and
spending time with his children in recreation
activities. Rick stated that he receives mas-
sages and occasionally stands with the use
of a walker to stimulate his thigh muscles
and to decrease the spasticity in his legs. In
regards to his independence he stated: ' 'I am
a very independent person. I do not need
help with much. I can do most of what I
could do back then. Thank God for that."
Rick's motivation for participating in the AT
program was to increase his strength and en-
durance and learn how to swim better. How-
ever, he stated that he has a tendency to get
frustrated when learning new skills because
he wants to be good at it initially.
Setting
The study was conducted at the aquatics
center of a large rehabilitation facility lo-
Third Quarter 1997 163
cated in the southeastern United States. The
aquatic center has a fully accessible pool (25
yds. in length) that offers multiple methods
of entry including the following: 3' wide
stairs with handrails, transfer wall, indepen-
dently operated chair lift, a ramp, and net
lift. The pool has a 30' long, 1 V2' deep area
for sitting and is equipped with a 10' long,
3-4' deep therapy area with a handrail. The
water temperature was regulated from 86-
90 degrees during the AT program.
Design
A single subject, multiple baseline design
was used with four adults with SGI to deter-
mine the effects of swimming on cardiovas-
cular endurance and vital capacity. Al-
though, Mary participated in the program for
only 10 weeks due to scheduling conflicts
with school, the three other participants re-
mained in the program for 15 weeks. Joe
began the intervention first after 5 baseline
measures, Mary was second with 8 baseline
measures, Paul began after 11 baseline mea-
sures, and Rick after completing 12 out of
a possible 15 baseline measures. Rick was
absent for some measures because of illness.
Although follow-up observation occurred
with Joe, Paul and Rick 2.5 weeks after the
conclusion of the intervention, Mary's fol-
low-up was 3.5 weeks after the end of inter-
vention due to scheduling conflicts.
Experimental Procedures
The study consisted of three phases: base-
line, intervention, and follow-up. Baseline
was used to establish each participant's sta-
ble level of physical functioning for all de-
pendent measures. The intervention con-
sisted of 30 minutes of swimming instruction
and 30 minutes of lap swimming. Swimming
instruction was based on the Halliwick
method (Campion, 1990). The Halliwick
method is a ten point psychomotor learning
process used to help individuals with disabil-
ities become independent moving in the wa-
ter (Lambeck, 1986). According to Lambeck(1986), this method does not use buoyancy
aids and focuses on developing participant's
water comfort, rotational control, balance,
and basic movement. After participants be-
came independent, the instruction was pro-
vided to increase stroke efficiency, stroke
repertoire, and range of motion. Lap swim-
ming was designed to practice technique and
improve strength and endurance. The in-
structor was a certified therapeutic recreation
specialist who was an aquatic therapist certi-
fied in the Halliwick method, and water
safety instruction. At the completion of the
intervention, a follow-up phase was con-
ducted to establish the maintenance effect of
the intervention and to ascertain measures of
social validity.
Baseline
During the baseline period, participants
were asked to come to the rehabilitation cen-
ter three times per week to complete the
Cooper 12 Minute Swim Test, and measure
their forced vital capacity, heart rate (HR),
and blood pressure (BP). After testing, parti-
cipants were offered the opportunity to en-
gage in free swim.
Intervention
The intervention consisted of three regu-
larly scheduled days in which participants
arrived at the pool at least 30 minutes prior
to the swimming program. Participants were
tested with the identical procedures used dur-
ing baseline. After testing, participants en-
tered the pool for the Cooper 12 Minute
Swim Test and then participated in swim-
ming instruction. Specifically, over the
course of the intervention, participants re-
ceived 30 minutes of swimming instruction
in comfort, rotational control, the elementary
back stroke, front crawl, back crawl and
breast stroke. After instruction, the partici-
pants completed the 12 minute Cooper Swim
Test and then participated in approximately
30 minutes of lap swimming to practice their
strokes and receive further individual in-
struction regarding stroke technique.
164 Therapeutic Recreation Journal
Follow-up
Participants were tested 2.5-3.5 weeks
post-intervention to determine the mainte-
nance effect of the program. Identical proce-
dures associated with the baseline were fol-
lowed with the addition of an in-depth social
validity interview to ascertain the partici-
pants' perceptions of the effects of the AT
program.
Data Collection
The primary method of data collection
included observations of endurance and
forced vital capacity which was collected in
a time series manner. Secondary measures
which were not collected throughout the in-
vestigation were obtained via a body fat test
and social validity interviews. These mea-
sures were used to provide additional infor-
mation to improve understanding of the in-
tervention but were not considered primary
measures because data were not collected at
regular intervals throughout the study.
Direct Observations
Endurance. The Cooper 12 Minute Swim
Test was used to assess participants cardiore-
spiratory fitness through swimming (Cooper,
1982). A concurrent validity coefficient of
.90 was demonstrated for the test using the
rate of maximal oxygen uptake that males
between the ages 17 to 52 consumed on a
treadmill (Cooper, 1982). Treadmill tests us-
ing the rate of oxygen consumption also re-
vealed concurrent validity score of .90 for
14 year old and college age males (Safrit,
1986). Reliability coefficients generated
from additional studies conducted with boys
and girls ages 10 to 12 and boys ages 11 to
13 ranged from .75 to .92 respectively. No
reliability or validity scores are available for
individuals with disabilities. The Cooper 12
Minute Swim Test was conducted as fol-
lows: participants began in the shallow end
of the pool and on the signal to start, they
pushed off from the side and swam as far as
possible in 12 minutes using any stroke andresting when necessary. The trained observer
recorded the lengths the participants com-
pleted in the 12 minute period. After the test
was completed, the participants continued
slowly swimming to cool down.
Vital Capacity. Vital capacity (VC) was
measured using a respirometer to gauge
forced expiratory volume. To measure VC,
participants were asked to insert a mouth-
piece, take as deep a breath as possible, and
blow out to the maximum extent possible.
The forced volume in cubic centimeters (cc)
were recorded. The participants' vital capac-
ity measures were taken prior to entering and
immediately after they exited the pool.
Observer Accuracy. To establish ob-
server accuracy, the investigators observed
volunteers performing the dependent mea-
sures (i.e., 12 minute Swim Test and forced
vital capacity). The first author conducted an
initial measurement and recorded the scores.
To increase accuracy, scores for each of the
measures were recorded by two other trained
observers. When the scores between the first
author and the other two observers resulted
in at least a 90% agreement, the investigators
were deemed ready to collect data.
Observer Agreement. To assess reliabil-
ity, a primary and secondary observer re-
corded measurements during 20% of the ses-
sions (N = 12). Observer agreement was cal-
culated by the number of agreements divided
by the number of agreements plus the num-
ber of disagreements on dependent mea-
sures. Inter-rater agreement on the measures
was consistently above 85%.
Secondary Measures
Body Fat Testing. Body fat testing was
administered at the beginning of baseline and
at the end of the intervention using a Futrex-
5000A Body Fat and Fitness Computer. The
accuracy level of this instrument is ± 2%
(Futrex, Version 7.0). Body fat testing refers
to the percentage of total body weight that
is fat (Horvat & Kalakian, 1996). According
to Horvat and Kalakian (1996), ideal fatness
for good health ranges from 10-15% in
Third Quarter 1997 165
males and 15-20% in females. The authors
added that ideal fatness promotes good
health and motor skills.
Social Validity Interviews. Initial and fol-
low-up interviews were conducted by the au-
thors using an interview guide. The purpose
of the interviews were to ascertain partici-
pants' perceptions of (a) study goals, (b) ef-
fects of the intervention, (c) their physical
functioning, and (d) their leisure participa-
tion. The final interview was conducted after
the study was completed to explore percep-
tions of the program and assess participants'
perceptions of the social validity of goals,
procedures, effect and optimal level of per-
formance (Wolf, 1978).
Data Analysis
The primary dependent measures for each
participant were calculated and plotted on a
graph. This procedure allowed the partici-
pants' performance to be visually inspected
and evaluated for change in trends, perfor-
mance and levels of measurements. To help
assess the level of each phase, the median
score for each was calculated.
The results of the secondary measure of
body fat were recorded on a table for obser-
vations of changed scores. Because repeated
measurements of body fat were not collected
during this study, these data were viewed as
secondary sources of information to provide
insight into the primary data measures ob-
tained via observation.
Based on suggestions by Patton (1990),
the social validity interviews were tran-
scribed and analyzed by coding the re-
sponses to identify categories associated
with the (a) program goals and (b) the effects
of the program. Categories which emerged
from the data included participants' percep-
tions of how AT influenced their physical,
social and leisure behaviors. The material
was synthesized for each participant to estab-
lish meaning related to perceptions of the
AT program's social validity.Results
The following data were observed during
the baseline, intervention and follow-up
phases for lap swimming and vital capacity.
Results of the body fat tests and social valid-
ity interviews provided additional informa-
tion regarding the effects of the AT program.
Lap Swimming
Figure 1 shows the number of lengths it
took Joe, Mary, Paul and Rick to complete
the swimming task. During baseline, the par-
ticipants swam a median of 10, 10, 11 and
11 lengths, respectively. All participants
demonstrated a stable trend across baseline
prior to intervention. During intervention, all
participants had an increasing trend with me-
dian scores improving at least one length
over the course of the program. Joe swam a
median of 12 lengths (range 10-13) with at
Baseline Swimming Intervention Follow-up
FIGURE 1. NUMBER OF LENGTHS
SWAM IN 12 MINUTES ACROSS FOUR
PARTICIPANTS.
166 Therapeutic Recreation Journal
least a 50 yard improvement over baseline.
Mary swam a median of 11 lengths (range
10-12) with the last two weeks of interven-
tion demonstrating a consistent score of 12
lengths. Paul swam a median score of 12
lengths (range 11-14) with the last 3 weeks
of intervention averaging 14 lengths. Rick
swam a median of 12 lengths (range 11-
13). While Rick's median score did improve,
Rick experienced considerable pain and
spasticity over the course of the intervention
due to a chronic urinary tract infection. This
condition resulted in variable scores and ab-
sences during the study. Although partici-
pants' follow-up scores improved from base-
line, their follow-up scores were below their
average intervention scores.
Vital Capacity
Figure 2 shows the VC in cubic centime-
ters for Joe, Mary, Paul and Rick before and
after swimming. During baseline, partici-
pants showed non-accelerating trends in VC.
Specifically, Joe had a pre-swim median
score of 3.8 (range 3.8-3.83) and a 3.9 post-
swim score (range 3.82-3.42). Mary had a
median pre-swim score of 3.2 (range 3.08-
3.25) and 3.25 post-swim score (range 3.06-
3.3). Paul had a median pre-swim score of
5.0 (range 4.69-5.2) and 5.2 post-swim
score (range 4.85-5.35). Finally, Rick had
a median pre-swim score of 3.2 (range 2.5-
3.28) and a post-swim score of 3.25 (range
2.55-3.78).
The intervention median VC scores for
Joe were variable but accelerating with pre-
swim scores of 4.55 (range 4-5.43) and
post-swim scores of 5.3 (range 4.05-6.4). A
comparison of the test scores from baseline
to intervention reflect a .7 to 1.4 improve-
ment in pre and post VC respectively, with
a two point improvement in general acute
scores. During intervention Mary had a me-
dian pre-swim score of 3.2 (range 3.14-
3.35) and a post-swim score of 3.4 (range
3.2-3.6). Mary showed little improvement
in VC when pre and post test median scores
were compared from baseline to interventionBaseline Swimming Intervention Follow-up
5 ... .10. . . .15. . ...... .25. . . .30. . . .35. . . .40. .......
Sessions
FIGURE 2. CUBIC CENTIMETERS OF
FORCED VITAL CAPACITY ACROSS
FOUR PARTICIPANTS.
(0 and .2 pre to post test scores, respec-
tively). Paul had a median pre-swim score
of 4.9 (range 4.7-5.2) and a median post
swim score of 5.0 (range 4.75-5.23). These
results demonstrate a small improvement in
acute scores of .1 and decelerating median
scores of . 1 and .2 for pre and post test VC,
respectively. However, Paul reported on his
24 hour medical history that he had quit
smoking during the fourth week of interven-
tion and this may have affected his scores.
Finally, Rick had a median pre-swim score
of 3.1 during intervention (range 2.8-3.7)
and a post-swim median score of 3.3 (range
3.1-3.7). Although these scores show a
small acute improvement of .25 during the
intervention for post-swim scores, the scores
decreased slightly by .1 from baseline pre-
swim scores.
Third Quarter 1997 167
The pre and post swim scores during fol-
low-up showed a maintenance effect for Joe
with pre and post swim scores of 4.6 and
5.4, respectively. Both scores were above his
average intervention score. Mary had scores
that were above baseline averages but not
above post intervention median scores and a
decelerating acute score with scores of 3.4
and 3.3 for pre and post swim scores respec-
tively. Paul's follow-up scores demonstrated
a small acute improvement with pre and post
swim scores 4.9 to 5.0, respectively. These
scores were equal to intervention medians.
Rick showed improved median scores from
the intervention phase with pre and post
swim scores of 3.5 and 3.55 respectively. In
general, all participants showed a mainte-
nance effect for the follow-up measures of
VC for at least 2.5 weeks post intervention.
Secondary Measures
Body Fat Test. The body fat tests were
administered prior to the intervention and
after the intervention. Measures taken 2.5
weeks post intervention indicated a decrease
in body fat for all participants (see Table 1).
The minimal change in Mary's body fat may
have been influenced by Mary not receiving
her post-intervention test for 3.5 weeks after
the end of intervention or that she only re-
mained in the intervention for 10 weeks due
to a scheduling conflict.
Social Validity Interviews. Interviews
were conducted with each participant prior
to and after the intervention to ascertain their
perceptions of the AT program. Each partici-
Percentage
Participant
Joe
Mary
Paul
RickTable 1.
of Body Weight that is
Pre
32.7
25.7
13.9
14.4Fat
Post
24.6
25.0
11.9
12.7pant reported numerous benefits related to
the program.
Participants' exit interview focused on
the perceived physical and leisure benefits
of the AT program. When asked about the
difference between swimming and the exer-
cise he was doing prior the intervention Joe
stated:
Swimming has improved my endur-
ance and breathing. Swimming also
exercises my arms in a different way
than weights did. Let's face it, when
I was walking, I never swam twelve
consecutive minutes. I feel it has
helped me keep my weight down. I
feel the additional strength helps me
in activities of daily living and it has
improved my stamina (in activity).
Joe emphasized the importance of being in-
dependent in swimming which allowed him
to continue participating in this activity: "I
feel it was remarkable that I learned to propel
myself in the water. Now I can do laps too.
I plan on continuing three times per week."
Regarding the social importance of the expe-
rience Joe stated:
I think it is a good experience because
it teaches swimming while building
strength and endurance and gives me
a focus. I think it is good for handi-
capped people to get in a pool rather
than mold to a chair and watch TV.
Mary expressed positive feelings regarding
the physical effects of participation in the
swim program when she stated:
It made me feel good. Sometimes it
was a little too structured, but I felt
good getting the exercise. Physically,
I felt different. I felt stronger and in
better shape. I hope to continue if I
can find the time. My comfort (in the
water) has improved.
168 Therapeutic Recreation Journal
Mary commented on her unique perspective
of being the only women in the program and
how that played a role in the socialization
which occurred during the program:
I think it was interesting that I came
to like the other guys. I remember the
first day when I saw them and I went
oh, I am the only female here and I
do not have much in common with
them. But they were really nice and I
enjoyed being with them. So the so-
cialization part ended up being nice.
Paul's final interview reflected percep-
tions of improved physical well-being and
changes in patterns of exercise as he stated:
I used to only workout in the weight
room. This (swimming) is more aero-
bic. I can feel the difference in my
pushing. Me and my girls will some-
times walk down to the bridge. It is
about a half mile to the bridge and I
can tell the difference on the hill. I am
not breathing as hard and I can carry
on a conversation with my girls rather
than trying to catch my breath.
In addition, Paul discussed how participation
in the program had influenced his drinking
patterns:
I have been on the wagon for a week
or so now. I am probably not an alco-
holic but I was spending too much
time in the bars. It made me sit back
and think about my goals and what I
wanted to do and that I wasn't going
to accomplish it if I was going to con-
tinue drinking and not reach the physi-
cal condition I could reach.
Regarding the program in general, Paul em-
phasized that he was glad to increase his
knowledge and skills in swimming when he
stated that:It gives me something to do that is
healthy and fun and does not cost any
more money. Plus getting in better
shape so I can do other things and
meeting the nice people (are benefits
of the program).
In terms of his future plans, Paul stated that,
"I will continue swimming. I will try to do
at least a mile, and when I can do that I will
increase my distance. That is my goal."
Rick reported experiencing various phys-
ical benefits from swimming especially in
regards to the tightness in his legs and his
spasticity, as he stated:
It seems to help the legs and the whole
body. I am not stiff like I use to be. I
use to have to sit in the shower and
let the water run over my body just to
let it relax. My whole body is relaxed
when I get home after swimming.
Swimming is also a good workout for
me. When you lift weights, you only
work one portion of the body at a time.
But in the water, you work every mus-
cle just by swimming.
Regarding the value of the program, Rick
stated:
All people in wheelchairs should do
this. I think if a lot of people knew
really how the water was, they would
do it. I had no idea until I got in it. I
didn't think I could do it. You can do
more than you think. I am joining a
swim team.
Discussion
Measurement of the effects of an AT
swimming program (10-15 weeks, 3 X
week) on participants with SCI, as measured
by the Cooper 12 minute swim test, revealed
that endurance increased for these four indi-
viduals. Although follow-up scores of endur-
Third Quarter 1997 169
ance indicated that these effects decreased
over time, follow-up scores still remained
above baseline scores indicating a residual
effect for a period of 2.5 weeks after the
conclusion of the program. This finding sug-
gests that although there is some residual
effect from participation in an AT program,
continued participation appears necessary to
maintain gains in endurance. In addition, al-
though small improvements in acute pre and
post-test scores were demonstrated by all
participants in VC, improved scores for VC
were not observed.
These results support literature examin-
ing the effects of AT on endurance. For ex-
ample, in an initial experiment by Edlund
(1980) and a subsequent report by Edlund et
al. (1986) the effects of a 12-week swim-
ming therapy program on the strength, en-
durance and pulmonary function of 12 chil-
dren with cystic fibrosis and 11 children who
did not receive AT were examined. Although
a significant improvement was found in their
clinical state of disease (p < .05) for both
studies, the children did not significantly im-
prove 'their pulmonary function. They did,
however, show a statistically significant im-
provement over the control group in endur-
ance (p < .01). In another study with indi-
viduals without disabilities, Burke and Kee-
nan (1984) examined five women (M age 37)
and five men (M age 33) volunteers using the
elementary backstroke at various intensities
(mild, medium and fast) to examine energy
cost and to determine if heart rate and per-
ceived exertion are useful for monitoring in-
tensity. The American College of Sports
Medicine's recommendations that healthy
individuals work at 60%—90% of their maxi-
mal heart rate reserve and reach a score be-
tween 12-14 on the Borg Perceived Exer-
tion Scale (Borg, 1970) were achieved dur-
ing the medium and fast intensity periods.
Endurance was examined by Wright and
Cowden (1986) who measured the effect of
swim training on teenagers with mental re-
tardation in a non-randomized, pre-test/post-
test control group study with one group of25 who participated in a training program
and a control group of 25 who did not partici-
pate in exercise. Results showed that this
program contributed to a significant increase
in cardiovascular endurance (p < .05) for
participants in the experimental group when
compared to the control group. Similarly, the
results of this study with participants who
have SCI supports the potential effects for
AT to have a positive influence on partici-
pants endurance.
Although repeated measures of body fat
were not taken, decreased levels of partici-
pants' percentage of body fat from the begin-
ning of the program provide some support
that participants increased their fitness level.
Must, Jacques, Dallali, Bajema, and Dietz
(1992) emphasized that as many as 40 mil-
lion or more Americans are obese, which
means their body fat content exceeds 25%
(men) or 30% (women) of their total body
weight. While these figures are not specific
to people with disabilities, considering these
data in conjunction with Krause and Crew's
(1987) observation that after injury individu-
als with SCI increased their sedentary activ-
ity creates reason for concern. While de-
creased body fat was observed for all four
participants, there was an indication that the
program may have an even greater effect
for those considered to be overweight. For
example, prior to the program, Joe's body
fat was 32.7%, the highest of all participants.
Joe reduced his total percentage of body fat
to 24.6 over the course of the intervention.
Based on the social validity interviews,
all participants indicated a desire to continue
to swim after the conclusion of the study.
This choice supports the conclusion drawn
from an AT study conducted with individu-
als with multiple sclerosis (Broach, Groff,
Dattilo, Yaffe, & Gast, 1996) that one advan-
tage of teaching leisure skills during therapy
is that it can enhance physical functioning
while encouraging participation in that activ-
ity. The desire to continue to swim is evi-
denced in the interview statements by parti-
cipants in regards to their goals to continue
170 Therapeutic Recreation Journal
swimming. The positive responses reported
and a desire to continue swimming suggest
that participants may have viewed swim-
ming as a leisure experience.
Recommendations for Research
This study provides support for the use
of an AT swimming program to improve the
endurance of individuals with SCI. Further
research is needed to replicate these findings
and improve the external validity of the
study. In addition, more research is needed
to examine alternatives to passive exercise
for individuals with SCI and to more fully
understand how swimming influences func-
tioning. Future studies with individuals with
SCI may benefit from examination of per-
ceived exertion and range of motion. Studies
which include measures of flow, social inter-
action, enjoyment and affect could help ex-
amine the psychological impact of AT. Ex-
ploration of factors that contribute to a desire
to continue an activity may assist therapists
using AT interventions to work toward con-
tinuing participants' active leisure lifestyle
after rehabilitation goals have been achieved.
In addition, to increase the precision of infor-
mation derived from lap swimming, future
studies using these methods may include
measurements reported in yards rather than
pool lengths. Finally, involving participants
with other disabling conditions such as those
with acute injuries, cystic fibrosis, muscular
dystrophy, exercise induced asthma or those
who have higher cervical or thoracic injuries
may be helpful.
Recommendations for Practice
According to Lee, Brock, Dattilo, and
Kleiber (1994), SCI is an injury that influ-
ences all aspects of an individual's life. The
authors concluded from an examination of
the literature that increased free time associ-
ated with many who acquire a disability re-
sults in an increase in the value of leisure
participation. Therefore, therapeutic recre-
ation specialists are encouraged to providetherapy that not only improves physical
function, but facilitates adherence to activi-
ties after rehabilitation. Accordingly, facili-
tating independence in a leisure activity such
as swimming though an AT intervention is
recommended for appropriate participants'
with SCI. In addition, because inpatient
lengths of stay are decreasing (Carter, 1991),
practitioners are sometimes unable to pro-
vide extensive therapeutic recreation ser-
vices. Therefore, opportunities for individu-
als with SCI to receive post-discharge com-
munity based rehabilitation using therapeutic
recreation resources are recommended. AT
is one modality that therapeutic recreation
specialists can use to assist an individual
with SCI to improve function while learning
a life-time leisure skill.
Conclusion
This study provides support for the use
of an AT swimming to improve the endur-
ance of adults with SCI. Although results of
the Cooper 12 minute swim test revealed that
endurance increased for these four individu-
als, scores for improved VC were not ob-
served. The finding that the follow-up scores
of endurance decreased but were still above
baseline scores suggested that, although
there is some residual effect from participa-
tion in an AT program, continued participa-
tion in aquatic activity is necessary to main-
tain gains in endurance. The positive re-
sponses and desire to continue participation
in the program reported by the participants
during the social validity interviews sug-
gested that participants may have viewed
swimming as a leisure experience.
References
Benedict, A. & Freeman, R. (1993). The effect
of aquatic exercise on aged person's bone density,
body image and morale. Activities, Adaptation &
Aging, 17, 67-85. Champaign, IL: Human Kinet-
ics Publishers.
Berger, B. & Owen, D. (1992). Mood alteration
Third Quarter 1997 171
with yoga and swimming: Aerobic exercise may
not be necessary. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 75,
1331-1343.
Broach, E. & Dattilo, J. (1996). Aquatic ther-
apy: A viable therapeutic recreation intervention.
Therapeutic Recreation Journal, 30, 213—239.
Broach, E., Groff, D., Dattilo, J., Yaffe, R., &
Gast, D. (in press). The effects of aquatic therapy
on adults with multiple sclerosis. Annual in Thera-
peutic Recreation.
Borg, B. V. (1970). Perceived exertion as an
indicator of somatic stress. Scandinavian Journal
of Rehabilitation Medicine, 2, 92-98.
Burke, E. J. & Keenan, M. D. (1984). Energy
cost, heart rate, and perceived exertion during the
elementary backstroke. The Physician and Sports
Medicine, 12(12), 75-79.
Campion, M. R. (1990). Adult hydrotherapy.
Oxford: Heinemann Medical Books.
Campion, M. R. (1985). Hydrotherapy in pedi-
atrics. Oxford: Heinemann Medical Books.
Carter, M. J. (1991). Designing therapeutic
recreation programs in the community. Reston,
VA: AAHPERD.
Cooper, K. H. (1982). The aerobics program
for total well-being. New York: M. Evans and
Company.
Coyle, C. P., Shank, J. W., Kinney, W. T., &
Hutchins, D. A. (1993). Psychosocial functioning
and changes in leisure lifestyle among individuals
with chronic secondary health problems related to
spinal cord injury. Therapeutic Recreation Jour-
nal, 27, 239-252.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow: The psy-
chology of optimal experience. New York: Harper
Collins.
Dishman, R. (1994). Advances in exercise ad-
herence. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.
D'Urso, M. & Logue, G. (1988). Competitive
adapted sport for impaired older adults. Therapeu-
tic Recreation Journal, 22, 56—64.
DeVivo, M. J. (1990). Life expectancy and
causes of death for persons with spinal cord injur-
ies. In D. F. Apple & L. M. Hudson (Eds.), Spinal
cord injury: The model proceedings of the national
consensus conference on catastrophic illness and
injury (pp. 66—71). Atlanta: Shepherd Center.
Edlund, L. D. (1980). Effects of a swimming
program on cystic fibrosis children. DissertationAbstracts International, 35(01), (University Mi-
crofilms No. H420E414.E33).
Edlund, L. D., French, R. W., Herbst, J. J.,
Ruttenberg, H. D., Ruhling, R. O., & Adams, T. D.
(1986). Effects of a swimming program on chil-
dren with cystic fibrosis. American Journal of Dis-
eases in Children, 140, 80-83.
Frieden, L. (1990). Community integration and
follow-up. In D. F. Apple and L. M. Hudson
(Eds.), Spinal cord injury: The model proceedings
of the national consensus conference on cata-
strophic illness and injury (pp. 38-41). Atlanta:
Shepherd Center.
Garvey, L. A. (1991). Spinal cord injury and
aquatics. Clinical Management, 11, 21-24.
Hedrick, B. N. (1982). Promoting the active
sport participation of the physically disabled by
enhancing their perceptions of competence. In G.
Hitzhusen (Ed.) Expanding horizons in therapeutic
recreation, IX (pp. 155-167). Missouri: Curators
University of Missouri.
Hedrick, B. N. (1986). Wheelchair sport as a
mechanism for altering the perceptions of the non-
disabled regarding their disabled peers' compe-
tence. Therapeutic Recreation Journal, 20, 72-84.
Horvat, M., & Kalakian, L. (1996). Assessment
in adapted physical education and therapeutic rec-
reation. Dubuque, IA: Brown & Benchmark.
Hurley, E., & Turner, C. (1991). Neurology
and aquatic therapy. Clinical Management, 11(1),
26-30.
Jackson, R. W., & Davis, G. M. (1983). The
value of sports and recreation for the physically
disabled. In M. Korn (Ed.), Orthopedics Clinics
of North America, 14 (pp. 301-315). Philadelphia:
W. B. Saunders.
Krause, J. S., & Crew, N. M. (1987). Predic-
tion of long-term survival of persons with spinal
cord injury: An 11 year prospective study. Reha-
bilitation Psychology, 32, 205-213.
Krause, J. S., & Kjorsvig, J. M. (1992). Mor-
tality after spinal cord injury: A four-year prospec-
tive study. Archives of Physical Medicine and Re-
habilitation, 73, 558-563.
Lee, Y., Brock, S., Dattilo, J., & Kleiber, D.
(1993). Leisure and adjustment to spinal cord in-
jury: Conceptual and methodological suggestions.
Therapeutic Recreation Journal, 27, 200—211.
Must, A., Jacques, P., Dallali, G. E., Bajema,
C. J., & Dietz, W. H. (1992). Long-term morbidity
and mortality of overweight adolescents. New En-
gland Journal of Medicine, 372, 1350-1355.
172 Therapeutic Recreation Journal
Patton, M. Q. (1990). Qualitative evaluation Williams, T. (1995). Disability sport socializa-
and research methods. Newbury Park, CA: Sage tion and identity construction. Adapted Physical
Publications. Activity Quarterly, 11, 14-31.
Safrit, M. J. (1986). Introduction to measure- Wolf, M. (1978). Social validity: The case for
ment in physical education and exercise science. subjective measurement or how applied behavior
St. Louis: Times Mirror/Moseby. analysis found its heart. Journal of Applied Behav-
ior Analysis, 11, 203-214.
Smith, R. (1992). Kids take the plunge. Reha-
bilitation Management, 12, 31-36. . Wright, J., & Cowden, J. E. (1986). Changes
in self-concept and cardiovascular endurance of
National SCI Statistical Center (1995). Spinal mentally retarded youths in a Special Olympics
cord injury: Facts and figures at a glance. Bir- swim training program. Adapted Physical Activity
mingham, AL: Spain Rehabilitation. Quarterly, 3, 177-183.
Third Quarter 1997 173
