ANNALS OF “DUNAREA DE JOS” UNIVERSITY OF GALATI 
FASCICLE XV ISSN – 1454 – 9832 7 2012  
 
 160 THE ROLE OF RISK MANAGEMENT IN DECREASING THE 
NUMBER OF LAWSUITS OVER SWIMMING POOLS 
 
Izadi BEHZAD,1  Mohammadi SARDAR 1, Nasim SALEHI 2 
1University of Kurdistan, Sanandaj, IRAN 
1Department of Physical Education and Sport Science,  University of Kurdistan,  
Sanandaj, IRAN 
2Young researches club, science and research branch,  Islamic Azad University, Kurdistan, 
Iran  
 
Abstract 
The purpose of this research is to study the risk m anagement practices in order to 
decrease the number of lawsuits over public and pri vate swimming pools  in Tehran. 
The statistical population of the research included  310 managers of  public and 
private swimming pools, of which 119 were selected as statistical samples by means 
of random sampling. The research method was descrip tive and survey, and in 
measurement form. 2 questionnaires were used: one r elating to demographic data 
and general information, and the other to risk mana gement practices, and their 
validity was determined by alpha kronbach method. T he required information was 
collected by personal interviews during the time ac ting of managers in pools 
gathered and the data was analyzed by using person correlation coefficient. The 
result of this study indicated that: significant re lationship existed between incidents 
of accidents/injuries and lawsuits over swimming po ols in Tehran. Significant 
relationship existed between risk management practi ces and accidents/injuries and 
lawsuits. Significant relationship existed between risk management practice and 
lawsuits and lawsuits.   
Keywords : Risk management, accidents/injuries, lawsuits, po ols 
 
INTRODUCTION 
A new era for sports began in the 1960s 
when a New Jersey court awarded a gymnast more 
than $1 million in a negligence suit and a Californ ia 
court awarded a football player over $300000. Prior  to 
1960, injuries sustained during participation in 
intercollegiate sports were considered part of the 
game; assuming the risk of injury was part of the p lay. 
The 1982 verdict in the landmark Thompson v. Seattle 
public school District  cases attracted much attention: 
$6.2 million was awarded to a high school football 
player who sustained a neck injury from lowering hi s 
head to ward off tacklers, yet was not warned of th e 
inherent danger of his action. The need for ways to  
predict and manage exposure brought sports safety 
and risk management consultants into the field of 
recreation, as well as athletics (Girvan & Girvan, 
1993). 
Most aquatic center environments and 
hazards are highly dynamic, changing day to day, an d 
even minute to minute. Consequently, risk 
management in aquatics must be regarded as an 
ongoing process, requiring a considerable time 
commitment by trained staff and a focus on a regime n 
involving continuous monitoring and evaluation. All  
aquatic activities, including instruction, competit ion, 
recreation and fitness require supervision by a tea cher 
or coach and a certified lifeguard. Safe aquatic supervision includes eight basic components: (1) 
Knowledge of Standard of Care, (2) Supervisory 
Competency, (3) Planning, (4) Participant Abilities , 
(5) Safe Environment, (6) Warnings and Instructions , 
(7) Emergency Management, and (8) Lifeguard 
Support. These eight components of aquatics 
supervision represent the minimum standards for an 
aquatic facility and program supervision. 
Fletemeyer (2003) stated that aquatic liability is 
approaching a paradigm shift and thus requires that  
aquatic professionals have a certain level of 
understanding to practice and implement the basic 
principles of aquatic risk management. He also said  
that the needs for aquatic risk management were 
threats of negligence litigation, a trend for court s to 
impose verdicts favoring the plaintiff, the need to  
better educate the public about aquatic safety, a h igh 
level of awareness by the public about the dangers 
associated with aquatic environments, and stronger 
emphasis on preventative practices rather than on 
reactionary measures. 
Most litigation involving aquatics emanates 
from the injury of a participant, the injured plain tiff 
alleging negligence on the part of the institution.  
Negligence, in such cases, is conduct that falls be low 
the standard established by the law for the protect ion 
of others against unreasonable risk or harm. In ord er 
for negligence to exist, four elements must be pres ent: 
ANNALS OF “DUNAREA DE JOS” UNIVERSITY OF GALATI 
FASCICLE XV ISSN – 1454 – 9832 7 2012  
 
 161 (1) the defendant must owe the plaintiff a legal du ty 
of care, (2) the defendant must breach that duty, ( 3) 
the defendant’s breach of duty must be the proximat e 
cause of the plaintiff’s injury, and (4) the plaint iff 
must incur actual loss or damages. If the defendant  
institution can demonstrate that even one of the 
elements does not exist, there can be no negligence . 
Fletemeyer (2003) provided seven steps for increasi ng 
safety in aquatic risk management: step 1”” 
identifying goals and objectives; step 2”” organizi ng 
an assessment team; step 3”” identifying and 
measuring risks; step 4”” providing effective warni ng; 
step 5”” training staff; step 6””record keeping ; a nd 
step 7”” conducting performance and safety audits. 
Many hazards related to aquatic environment are not  
easily recognizable. The above seven steps really 
highlight the implementation of safety in aquatics.  If 
aquatic directors can follow all seven steps and ar e 
also willing to apply these seven steps in their aq uatic 
centers, it will not be difficult to see major 
improvements and a reduction in the accident rate i n 
the aquatic centers (Hsiao, 2005). 
Risk management has been defined as a 
scientific approach to dealing with pure risks by 
anticipating possible accidental losses and designi ng 
and implementing procedures that minimize the 
occurrence of losses or the financial impact of the  
losses that do occur. The concept of risk managemen t 
in recreation and sport began in the mid 1970s. The  
focus of risk management in recreation is on limiti ng 
exposure to danger, harm, or hazards to the facilit y. 
The most prevalent danger or harm that a facility 
manager would attempt to minimize is injuries to 
patrons at the facility that create the possibility  of 
lawsuits (Styles, 2002). 
Risk management was born of necessity – 
human, legal, and political. As early as the late 
1800’s, the American labor movement started to 
address the dangers of mining and factory work. Law s 
were passed and strikes were called as a result of 
existing mine and factory safety problems. While 
there are still dangers, the combination of federal  and 
state safety inspections, labor demands, protective  
equipment, and safety laws have resulted in safer 
conditions in modern mining operations and factorie s. 
The owners and operators of mines and factories now  
are faced with expensive litigation if an accident 
occurs. The earliest organizations to practice risk  
management were insurance companies whose 
techniques have been modified and applied by a 
variety of organizations including hospitals, publi c 
schools, and universities. 
Appenzeller (1998) stated that risk management 
has been associated with business and especially th e 
insurance industry for many years. Loss control, 
exposure to loss, pre” and post” loss objectives, r isk 
management strategies, and risk management 
techniques were common terms in both the business 
and insurance industries prior to the 1970s. In the  mid”1970s and especially in the 1980s and the 1990s , 
risk management became a familiar expression of a 
program designed to meet the sport litigation crisi s 
head”on. In the 21st century, risk management will 
become a close companion to the sport business 
industry in its attempt to reduce losses and exposu res, 
while increasing the desire to make the sport busin ess 
industry safer (Lhotsky, 2006). 
Risk management in sporting environments 
is not a new idea. A number of authors identified t he 
need for adopting risk management, safety practices  
and policies, but few have moved beyond traditional  
occupational health and safety approaches. Risk 
management strategies have been used in a wide 
range of sports (Otago & Brown, 2003). 
Sharp (1990) listed three compelling reasons 
to institute risk management programs in the physic al 
education/athletic setting. The first reason is the  
American public has assumed a litigious posture 
relative to athletics. The climate is extremely 
litigation oriented and lawyers seem to always be i n 
search of a “deep pocket” to cover costs of injury,  
regardless of who is at fault. The second reason of ten 
cited concerns the judicial attitude toward liabili ty and 
sports. Liability has been expanded to cover those 
who administer these sport and recreation programs.  
The usual defense of assumption of risk has been 
severely eroded over the past few years by judicial  
interpretation. The third factor is the trend towar d 
abrogation of government immunity. By providing a 
safe, honest, and efficient environment, a business  can 
reduce legal liability and enhance the positive 
reputation of the business. Effective risk manageme nt 
should identify as many liabilities and risk factor s as 
possible, present alternative solutions, and make c ost”
effective recommendations (Lhotsky, 2006). 
The importance of risk management as to the 
key liability and risk management trends into the 2 1 
century. Some of the future trends forecasted were as 
follows:  
1” Liability issues will continue to manifest 
themselves as problems that require sound risk 
management plans.  
2” Education in risk management strategies will 
continue to be in demand by sport/recreation 
managers in order to provide safer programs.  
3” Risk management will continue to be a key 
element in the design of new recreational sport 
facilities.  
4” Professional preparation in liability and risk 
management will become more important for students 
pursuing careers in sport management.  
5” Risk management planning will take on 
increased important to recreational sports programs .  
6” More recreational sports programs/agencies will 
develop comprehensive risk management plans. 
7” Increase in willingness of participants to engage 
in litigation to resolve issues related to particip ation in 
recreational sports.  
ANNALS OF “DUNAREA DE JOS” UNIVERSITY OF GALATI 
FASCICLE XV ISSN – 1454 – 9832 7 2012  
 
 162 8” There will be an increase demand for employee 
certification in specialized activity programs.  
9” There will be continued growth in recreational 
facilities.  
10” High”risk activities will become more popular in 
the years to come (Styles, 2002). 
Although the management of liability risks 
for public agencies is of recent origin, the practi ce has 
been used in the private sector for many years. The  
earliest organizations to practice risk management 
were insurance companies whose techniques have 
been modified and applied by hospitals, public 
schools, and universities. These groups dealt prima rily 
with financial risk management. However, the 
management of financial risks alone would not be 
sufficient for the unique needs of the sport, physi cal 
education and leisure industries. Therefore, the sp ort 
industry must focus on not only financial risk 
management but also programmatic risk management. 
For example, a loss in the insurance industry is 
financial, but a loss in the sport industry must al so 
encompass the possibility or risk that a participan t 
would suffer harm. It is acknowledged that a 
participant or employee injury could result in a 
financial loss to the agency or organization, but t he 
overriding reason for risk control should be moral 
responsibility as related to the injury of another,  as 
well as the legal duty to provide a safe environmen t 
for participation (Aaron, 2004). 
Because of the increase in the volume of use and th e 
types of activities performed, these facilities hav e a 
wide variety of exposure to lawsuits in their daily  
operations (Mulrooney & Farmer, 1995). There was a 
time when litigation was not a major issue for 
recreational sport injuries because it was accepted  that 
participants assumed the risks of participating in a 
physical activity. However, in todays society, laws uits 
against recreation businesses are common, as there 
has been an increase in litigation regarding injuri es 
sustained in recreational activity and competition 
(Burnstein, 1994; Cotton, 2001a).  
The focus of risk management in recreation 
is on limiting exposure to danger, harm, or hazards  to 
the facility. The most prevalent danger or harm tha t a 
facility manager would attempt to minimize is injur ies 
to patrons at the facility that create the possibil ity of 
lawsuits. Hence the goals of risk management are to  
enable organizations to offer the activities and 
services that they deem desirable in a safe 
environment and to reduce the possibility of a laws uit 
and monetary losses while operating a recreation 
facility. Based on the theory and practice of risk 
management from the insurance industry, sport and 
recreation professionals have identified the follow ing 
elements as being essential for success of the risk  
management practices: risk identification; risk 
assessment; risk treatment; and risk implementation  
and standard operating procedures (Styles, 2002).   Those who manage physical education, 
athletic, and recreation programs have a number of 
legal duties that they are expected to carry out. 
Among these is an obligation to take reasonable 
precautions to ensure safe programs and facilities.  
According to Hronek and Spengler (2002, p. 273), 
“the law recognizes a duty owed by coaches, 
recreation managers, and their staff to provide saf e 
facilities for both participants and spectators”. 
Physical educations and sports facilities that are 
poorly planned, designed, or constructed may lead t o 
many problems for program leaders in those faciliti es. 
A poorly designed facility may limit the programs t hat 
can be offered; make the facility harder to operate , 
maintain, and supervise; and significantly increase  the 
participant’s exposure to hazardous conditions. The se 
factors can lead to a greater likelihood of injury and 
can increase the organizations exposure to claims o f 
negligence (Seidler, 2006).  
It has important risk management 
applications for physical educators and sport 
managers. Physical educators and sport managers 
must be protective in protecting their participants  
from unreasonable risk of harm they should schedule  
regular inspections of fields and other playing 
surfaces before participant use. In addition, equip ment 
should be checked regularly to detect any damage or  
wear that would make the equipment unreasonably 
dangerous for participant use (Carroll & 
Connaughton, 2006) 
 
METHODOLOGY 
The statistical population of the research 
included 310 managers of public and private 
swimming pools, of which 119 were selected as 
statistical samples by means of random sampling. Th e 
research method was descriptive and survey, and in 
measurement form. 2 questionnaires were used, one 
relating to demographic data and general informatio n 
and the other to risk management practices and thei r 
validity was determined by alpha kronbach method 
(./85). The required information was collected by 
personal interviews during the time acting of 
managers in pools gathered and the data was analyze d 
by using person correlation coefficient. The study was 
designed to investigate the risk management status,  
and associated legal concerns in aquatic centers in  
Tehran. Data were obtained through a 45”item 
questionnaire administered to 119 directors of aqua tic 
facilities in Tehran.  
 
RESULTS 
Table 1 shows that the population was 
primarily male and only 27 or 22.7% of the 119 
participants were women. 
 
 
 
 
ANNALS OF “DUNAREA DE JOS” UNIVERSITY OF GALATI 
FASCICLE XV ISSN – 1454 – 9832 7 2012  
 
 163 Table 1. Gender of respondents  
Gender of respondents  (N = 119) 
Male 92 
Female 27 
Table 2 presents activities most often found 
in the pools in Tehran were recreational (offered b y 
117 institutions) and basic swimming classes (offer ed 
by 79 institutions). Risk management plans existed in 
only 52 (43.7%) of the facilities. Nearly 42% of th e 
institutions reported three or more accidents/injur ies 
per year. 
The majority of the incidents occurred in the 
locker room or the pool deck. Only 5% or 7 incident s 
occurred in the water (Table 2). Despite the fact t hat 
nearly half of the institutions had accidents, only  
22.6% had been sued (Tables 3 and 4). 
 
Table 2. General information: activities and risk 
management plan  
Activities offered by the  
swimming pool N 
Recreational 
Scuba diving class 
Water aerobic class 
Basic swimming class 
Water polo 
Lifeguard training course 
CPR certificated course 
Hydrotherapy 117 
5 
38 
79 
12 
35 
17 
22 
Risk management plan N 
Yes 
No 52 
67 
 
Table 3. General information: accidents/injuries 
frequency 
Number of accidents/injuries 
in the last 12 months Percent  
(N = 119) 0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 or more  45.4 
15.1 
8.4 
8.4 
6.7 
2.5 
13.4 
Location of highest number of 
reported accidents/incidents Percent  
(N = 119) 
Diving board 
Locker room 
Pool deck 
Jacuzzi 
Sauna  35.3 
23.5 
25.1 
10.1 
10.9 
 
Table 4. General information: litigation status  
Past Lawsuits Percent  
(N = 119) 
No 
Yes  77.3 
22.7 
Number of times the 
institution has been 
sued Percent  
(N = 119) 
0 
1 
2 
3 or more  77.3 
14.3 
5 
3.4 
Results of this study show that significant relatio nship 
existed between incidents of accidents/injuries and  
lawsuits in swimming pools in Tehran (Table 5). 
From other results of this study is significant 
relationship existed between risk management 
practice and accidents/injuries and lawsuits (Table  5). 
Also significant relationship existed between risk 
management practice and lawsuits and lawsuits (Tabl e 
5).  
 
 
Table 5. Pearson correlation coefficient between the acciden ts/injuries and lawsuits and risk management  
Variable Accidents/Injuries Lawsuits Risk managemen t practice 
AccidentsIinjuries 1 ./437(**) 
./000 ”./269(**) 
./003 
Lawsuits ./437(**) 
./000 1 ”./234(**) 
./010 
Risk management 
practice ”./269(**) 
./003 ”./234(**) 
./010 1 
 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
Risk is a peril or the possibility of exposure 
or harm. Risk management has been defined as 
controlling the financial and personal injury losse s 
from sudden, unforeseen, unusual accidents and 
intentional torts. Appenzeller (1998) stated that r isks 
are inherent in sport and even the safest programs can 
never avoid accidents and injuries. The law expects  
that sport managers develop risk management and loss programs to ensure a safe environment for all 
who participate in sports.  
The safety of facility event attendees, 
patrons, spectators and event participants is of 
primary concern to the facility manager (Madden, 
1998). If a facility manager does not keep the faci lity 
safe, injuries to attendees, patrons, spectators, a nd 
event participants are bound to occur. Although the re 
are many areas of law that are important to a facil ity 
ANNALS OF “DUNAREA DE JOS” UNIVERSITY OF GALATI 
FASCICLE XV ISSN – 1454 – 9832 7 2012  
 
 164 manager, the greatest numbers of lawsuits brought 
against a provider (school, municipality, private 
enterprise, or non”profit association) are based in  
negligence liability (van der Smissen, 2001). 
While lawsuits cannot be prevented they can 
be minimized when employees understand negligence 
principles and practice good management (Kaiser, 
1986). Therefore, it is essential that a facility m anager 
today understand the elements of negligence (van de r 
Smissen, 2001). The following will briefly examine 
negligence liability and some law topics related to  
negligence. 
Negligence can be defined as carelessly 
performing a duty or carelessly failing to perform a 
duty that results in injury to a participant or dam age to 
property (Seidler, 1999). In order to be found guil ty of 
negligence, four elements need to exist: duty, brea ch, 
cause, and harm. There are several elements of 
negligence. Each of the four negligence elements ha s 
to be present for a person to recover under a 
negligence claim. The four elements are: 
1. owing someone a duty; 
2. breaching that duty; 
3. the breach of that duty was the proximate cause of 
the person’s injury; 
4. the person was actually injured (van der Smissen , 
1990). 
The increase in lawsuits in the leisure and 
recreational area is due to several reasons: increa sed 
participation in recreation; an increase in year ro und 
activities; new technology and more sophisticated 
equipment; and increased accessibility to legal 
services (Baley & Mathews, 1984). 
The increase in litigation in recreational 
settings creates a need for recreational profession als 
to reduce risk that may lead to injuries and financ ial 
losses. Risk management and its application is form  
of loss control and has been identified by 
professionals in the recreational industry as a nee d 
within the organizational structure of a recreation al 
facility (Giles & Gonsoulin, 1991). The most 
prevalent danger that a recreational facility manag er 
needs to minimize is the number of injuries to patr ons, 
and the concomitant lawsuits. Therefore, the obviou s 
goal of risk management is to reduce to possible 
monetary losses when running a facility (Mulrooney 
& Ammon, 1995).  
Risk management has been identified as the 
‘best buy’ in sports injury prevention and an integ ral 
part of best”practice sport and leisure management 
systems (Donaldson et al, 2009). Risk management is  
a procedure to reduce potential legal liability. It  is a 
proactive system which attempts to address potentia l 
problem areas before they actually lead to reactive ly 
defending legal proceedings. The aim is a safer 
environment and “legally safer” operational 
procedures. Education of all people involved, their  
acceptance of the importance of risk management, an d 
open communication of ideas is vital to a risk management plan’s success. While the law now 
affects the conduct of sports greater than ever bef ore, 
don’t see this as a negative, but as a positive rea son to 
take the initiative to implement safe practices and  risk 
management programs. There can be a great sense of 
achievement in knowing that you are satisfying your  
legal, moral and ethical duties by providing good, safe 
and effective sporting services. It really is all a bout 
good business. 
 
REFERENCES 
1.  Aaron, T. C. 2004. Factors affecting the performanc e 
levels of risk management behaviors of Florida high  
school athletic directors. Doctoral Thesis, The Flo rida 
State University College of education.  
2.  Carroll, M. S. & Connaughton, D. P. 2006. Proper 
Maintenance of Athletic Fields and Legal Liability.  
Journal of Physical Education, Recreation & Dance; 
May/Jun 2006; 77, 5; Research Library pp: 10. 
3.  Girvan, G & Girvan, J. T. 1993. Risk management 
practices in athletics7A content analysis. Journal of 
Physical Education, Recreation & Dance; 64, 4; Rese arch 
Library, pp: 26. 
4.  Hsiao, R. 2005. Analysis of risk management practic es and 
litigation status in aquatic centers. Doctoral diss ertation, 
Florida State University College of Education, Copy right 
by ProQuest Information and Learning Company. 
5.  Lhotsky, G. J. 2006. An Analysis of risk management  at 
NCAA Division I7A Football Stadiums. Doctoral 
dissertation, Florida State University College of 
Education, Copyright by ProQuest Information and 
Learning Company. 
6.  Otago, L. & Brown, L. 2003. Risk management models in 
netball. Journal of Science and Medicine in Sport 6  (2): 
2167225. 
7.  Seidler, T. L. 2006. Planning and Designing Safe Fa cilities. 
Journal of Physical Education, Recreation & Dance; 
May/Jun 2006; 77, 5; Research Library p. 32. 
8.  Styles, A.E. 2002.The development of risk managemen t 
recommendations and guidelines for a university 
recreational facility. Doctoral dissertation, Kent State 
University of Ohio, Copyright by ProQuest Informati on 
and Learning Company. 
9.   Madden, T. D. 1998. Risk management and facility 
insurance. In T. D. Madden (Ed.), Public assembly f acility 
law (pp. 1997230). Irving, TX: International Associ ation of 
Assembly Managers 
10.  Van der Smissen, B. 2001. Elements of negligence. I n D. 
Cotton, J. T. Wolohan, & T. J. Wilde (Ed.), Law for  
recreation and sport managers (pp. 37745), Dubuque,  IA: 
Kendall/Hunt Publishing Company. 
11.  Donaldson, A & Borys, D & Finch, C & Middleton, M. 
2009. Developing an instrument to assess the Sports  Injury 
Risk Management Systems (SIRMS) of community sports  
clubs. Abstracts / Journal of Science and Medicine in 
Sport 12S, S1–S83 (S41).  
12.  Kaiser, R. A. 1986. Liability and law in recreation , parks, 
and sports. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice7Hall. 
13.  Seidler, T. L. 1999. Planning facilities for safety  and risk 
management. In T. H. Sawyer (Ed.), Facilities plann ing 
for physical activity and sport (pp. 65773), Dubuqu e, IA: 
Kendall/Hunt Publishing Company. 
14.  Van der Smissen, B. 1990. Legal liability and risk 
management for public and private entities. Cincinn ati: 
Anderson Publishing Company. 
15.  Burnstein, I. M. 1994. Liability for injuries suffe red in the 
course of recreational sports: application of the n egligence 
standard. University of Detroit Mercy Law Review, 7 1, 
99371023. 
16.  Cotton, D. J. 2001a. Defenses against liability. In  D. J. 
Cotton, J. Wolohan, & T. J. Wilde (Eds), law for 
ANNALS OF “DUNAREA DE JOS” UNIVERSITY OF GALATI 
FASCICLE XV ISSN – 1454 – 9832 7 2012  
 
 165 recreation and sport managers (PP. 59774). Dubuque,  IA: 
Kendall/Hunt. 
17.  Mulrooney, A & Farmer, P. 1995. The management of 
sport: its foundation and application (second ed.).  St. 
Louis: B. Mosby. 
18.  Baley, J. A & Mathews, D. L. 1984. Law and liabilit y in 
athletics, physical education, and recreation. Newt on, MA: 
Allyn and Bacon.  
19.  Giles, M & Gonsoulin, S. 1991. Risk management with  
teeth. National Intramural Recreation Sports Associ ation 
journal, 15(3), 376. 
20.  Mulrooney, A & Ammon, R. Jr. 1995. Risk management 
practices and their impact on insurance premiums an d 
loss reserves. Journal of legal aspects of sport, 5 (3), 57767.  
 
LE RÔLE DE LA GESTION DES RISQUES DANS 
LA REDUCTION DE POURSUITES 
JUDICIAIRES DE PISCINES 
 
Résumé 
Le but de cette recherche est d'étudier des pratiqu es 
de gestion des risques en baisse de poursuites dans  
les piscines publiques et privées à Téhéran. La 
population statistique de la recherche comprenait 3 10 
gestionnaires de piscines publiques et privées, don t 
119 ont été sélectionnés comme échantillons statistiques par le biais d'un échantillonnage 
aléatoire. La méthode de recherche était descriptiv e 
et d'enquête, et sous forme de mesure. 2 
questionnaires ont été utilisés, sur les données 
démographiques relatives à l'information générale e t 
l'autre à des pratiques de gestion des risques et l eur 
validité a été déterminée par alpha kronbach 
méthode. Les informations requises ont été recueill ies 
par des entrevues personnelles pendant le temps des  
gestionnaires agissant dans les piscines se sont ré unis 
et les données ont été analysées en utilisant le 
coefficient de corrélation personne. Le résultat de  
cette étude indiquent que: relation significative 
existait entre les incidents d'accidents et de bles sures 
et de poursuites dans les piscines à Téhéran. Relat ion 
significative existait entre la pratique de gestion  des 
risques et des accidents / blessures et des poursui tes 
judiciaires. Relation significative existait entre la 
pratique de gestion des risques et des poursuites 
judiciaires et de poursuites. 
MotsQclés:  gestion des risques, accidents et blessures, 
les poursuites judiciaires, Piscines 
 
THE PLACE OF GYMNASTICS IN PRIMARY EDUCATION. 
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS AND METHODOLOGICAL ASPECTS 
 
LaurenŃıu7Gabrıel TALAGHIR 1, Ihsan SARI 2 
 
Faculty of Physical Education and Sports, “Dunarea de Jos” University of Galati, ROMANIA 
2University School of Physical Education and Sport, Sakarya, TURKEY 
 
Abstract: 
Education is a long process that addresses theoreti cal and practical aspects. These 
will contribute to form future adults for the real life. Physical education is an 
important discipline in the process of education an d the basis is set in primary 
school. The aim of our article is to present the im portance of gymnastics as a 
compulsory subject in the curriculum and its role i n the organizing and disciplining 
of students at this age. In the same time, the auth ors want to present the effect of 
practical activities on the psychological evolution  of students and the possibility to 
realise good behavior using means from basic gymnas tics. 
Keywords : physical education, school gymnastics, curriculum  
  
INTRODUCTION 
The development of the young generation 
was always a concern of society as a whole, aiming to 
improve the relationship between the social command  
and the educational product at a rational level. 
From this perspective, the physical education 
discipline has evolved in recent years in the schoo l 
environment, being currently the appanage of 
specialist teachers at all levels of education. 
The approach to physical education in the 
primary stage with specialized staff was and still is a 
current concern for theorists and practitioners in the 
field. Physical education as part of the educational 
process is thus seen as a catalyst in the developme nt 
of students in this level of education, helping to 
balance the intellectual demands with the psycho”
motor and ludic ones, a very important aspect for 
organizing activities teaching with students aged 
between 6 and 10 years. 
By observing the general objectives of  
physical education, the organization of the lesson,  in 
terms of content elements, shall take into 
consideration the action methodology for learning, 
consolidating and improving the motor skills and 
abilities specific to certain sports branches too 
(Iconomescu, 2010). 
