Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ipsm20
The Physician and Sportsmedicine
ISSN: 0091-3847 (Print) 2326-3660 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ipsm20
Risk factors for shoulder pain and injury in
swimmers: A critical systematic review
Lee Hill, Malcolm Collins & Michael Posthumus
To cite this article:  Lee Hill, Malcolm Collins & Michael Posthumus (2015) Risk factors for shoulder
pain and injury in swimmers: A critical systematic review, The Physician and Sportsmedicine, 43:4,
412-420, DOI: 10.1080/00913847.2015.1077097
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/00913847.2015.1077097
View supplementary material 
Published online: 14 Sep 2015.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 1044
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 7 View citing articles 

CLINICAL FEATURE
REVIEW
Risk factors for shoulder pain and injury in swimmers: A critical systematic
review
Lee Hill1, Malcolm Collins1and Michael Posthumus1
1Division of Exercise Science and Sports Medicine, University of Cape Town, Boundary Road, Newlands, Western Cape 7700, South Africa
Abstract
Swimming is one of the most popular recreational and competitive sporting activities. In the
2013/2014 swimming season, 9630 men and 12,333 women were registered with the National
Collegiate Athletics Association in the USA. The repetitive nature of the swimming stroke and
demanding training programs of its athletes raises a number of concerns regarding incidence
and severity of injuries that a swimmer might experience during a competitive season. A number
of risk factors have previously been identified but the level of evidence from individual studies,
as well as the level of certainty that these factors predispose a swimmer to pain and injury, to our
knowledge has yet to be critically evaluated in a systematic review. Therefore, the primary objec-
tive of this review is to conduct a systematic review to critically assess the published evidence for
risk factors that may predispose a swimmer to shoulder pain and injury. Three electronic data-
bases, ScienceDirect, PubMed and SpringerLink, were searched using keywords “(Injury OR pain)
AND (Swim*) ”and “(Shoulder) AND (Swim*) ”. Based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria,
2731 unique titles were identified and were analyzed to a final 29 articles. Only articles with a
level of evidence of I, II and III were included according to robust study design and data analysis.
The level of certainty for each risk factor was determined. No studies were determined to have a
high level of certainty, clinical joint laxity and instability, internal/external rotation, previous
history of pain and injury and competitive level were determined to have a moderate level of
certainty. All other risk factors were evaluated as having a low level of certainty. Although several
risk factors were identified from the reviewed studies, prospective cohort studies, larger sample
sizes, consistent and robust measures of risk should be employed in future research.Keywords:
Predisposing, rotator cuff, shoulder, injury,
swimming
History
Received 22 April 2015
Accepted 24 July 2015
Published online 6 August 2015
Introduction
Swimming is one of the most popular recreational and com-
petitive sporting activities. In the 2013/2014 swimming sea-
son, 9630 men and 12,333 women were registered with the
National Collegiate Athletics Association Swimming and
Diving program [1]. Since it was first introduced as an Olym-
pic sport at the 1896 summer games [2], it has essentially
developed into an all year-round sport with athletes maintain-
ing significant training load (including swimming, strength
and dry land conditioning) after a competitive season has
ended [3]. This leads to an increased risk of sustaining an
injury, particularly musculoskeletal soft tissue injuries, among
swimmers. The repetitive nature of the swimming stroke and
demanding training programs of its athletes raises a number
of concerns regarding incidence and severity of injuries that a
swimmer might experience during a competitive season [4,5].
The most common site of injury is the shoulder [6 –8], with
supraspinatus tendinopathy being the most common pathol-
ogy [9 –12]. Kennedy and Hawkins [13] first described thecondition of “swimmer ’s shoulder ”as a “common, painful
syndrome of repeated shoulder impingement in swimmers ”.
It has been reported that 40 –91% of swimmers have experi-
enced shoulder pain in and around the shoulder joint
[12,14-16]. The shoulder pain may lead to functional impair-
ments, termination of participation and disability [16].
Despite the incidence and severity of shoulder pain and
injury in swimmers being well established, there is however a
lack of agreement as to the cause of shoulder pain in
swimmers. It has been suggested that due to the pervasive
and varied nature of swimmer ’s shoulder , it is unlikely that a
single cause can adequately address its prevalence [4].
A number of risk factors have however been identified but
the level of evidence [17] from individual studies, as well as
the level of certainty [18] that these factors predispose a
swimmer to pain and injury, to our knowledge has yet to be
critically evaluated in a systematic review. Therefore, the pri-
mary objective of this review is to conduct a systematic
review to critically assess the published evidence for risk
Correspondence: Michael Posthumus, Division of Exercise Science and Sports Medicine, University of Cape Town, Boundary Road, Newlands,
Western Cape 7700, South Africa. E-mail: mposthumus@me.comISSN: 0091-3847 (print)
Phys Sportsmed, 2015; 43 (4): 412 –
DOI: 10.1080/00913847.2015.1077097www.tandfonline.com/psm
© 2015 Taylor & Francis420
factors that may predispose a swimmer to shoulder pain and
injury.
Methods
Search strategy
Published articles that examined potential risk factors for
shoulder injuries in swimmers were reviewed using the
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-
Analyses guidelines [19]. An electronic database search of
SpringerLink, ScienceDirect and PubMed/Medline was con-
ducted using the search terms “(Injury OR pain) AND (risk*
OR incidence) AND (Swim* OR Triath*) ”,“(Injury OR pain)
AND (Swim*) ”and “(Shoulder) AND (Swim*) ”. The data-
base search was limited to articles between January 1985 and
December 2014. During first round of article identification,
all content on swimming was considered. This included
consulting current contents, reviews, textbooks, specialized
registers or experts in the particular field of study, and by
reviewing the references in the studies found. The titles,
abstracts and full texts were independently screened by two
of the authors (LH and MP). Articles were excluded if they
were unrelated to the topic or met the exclusion criteria out-
lined in Table 1.
Two rounds of reviewing the literature, using the three-
step method in each round, was performed. The first round
pertained to the review of articles from the search results of
the databases and the second round involved reviewing the
bibliography lists of identified articles from the first round.
Thereafter, the identified articles were critically appraised
according to the inclusion criteria outlined in Table 2.
Level of evidence and certainty
The 29 identified articles included in this review were
appraised using two established methods, namely level of
evidence and level of certainty [17,20], as recently applied insimilar systematic reviews [21,22]. According to the hierar-
chy of evidence, randomized controlled trials and high-
quality (all patients were enrolled at the same point in their
disease course [inception cohort] with ‡80% follow-up of
enrolled patients, large sample sizes, robust methodology),
prospective cohort studies are considered to be level I; lower-
quality (small sample sizes and weaker methodology), pro-
spective studies and retrospective studies are considered to be
level II; case –control and cross-sectional studies are consid-
ered to be level III; case series studies are level IV and expert
opinions are level V (Table 3) [17]. The authors LH and MP
independently ranked each included study according to these
criteria. The authors, LH and MP agreed on the level of
evidence assigned to each study.
In addition to evaluate the level of evidence of each study,
a level of certainty to the risk factor being associated with
shoulder injuries in swimming, was also incorporated into
this review. The authors, LH and MP ranked each identified
risk factor according to the US Preventative Service Task
Force [18] as either a high, moderate or low level of
certainty. The two authors agreed on the classification of
each risk factor. This classification method of the risk factors
identified in this review allows for a relative measure of
strength that an identified risk factor is associated with shoul-
der pain in swimmers. The levels are defined as shown
in Table 4.Table 1. A summary of exclusion criteria applied to identify relevant
articles.
1 Commentaries, book chapters, letters, editorials, conference
proceedings, case reports, conference, abstracts or non-peer-
reviewed articles
2 Studies not conducted in swimmers
3 Studies examining shoulder/upper limb injuries without reference
to shoulder pain or injury
4 Studies of other medical/systemic conditions (e.g. diabetes,
amyloidosis) without specific reference to shoulder pain/injuries
5 Animal or cadaver studies
Table 2. A summary of inclusion criteria applied to identify relevant
articles.
1 The article must include original data
2 The article must be published in English
3 The article must include a minimum of one potential risk factor for
shoulder pain or injury in swimmers
4 Provide a definition of pain/injury in the shoulder
5 The article must include an association with the 95% CI, p<0.05Table 3. Level of evidence (I –V) definitions used for study evaluation,
as previously defined by Wright et al. [20] and Obremskey et al. [17].
Level of
evidence Study types
I Randomized controlled trials and high-quality (large sample
sizes, robust methodology) prospective cohort studies
II Lower quality (small sample sizes, weaker methodology)
prospective and retrospective cohort studies
III Case –control
IV Case series
V Expert opinions
Table 4. Level of certainty (high-low) definitions used for risk assess-
ment, as previously defined by Sawaya et al. [18] and modified by
Posthumus et al. [22].
Level of
certainty Definition
High The available evidence includes consistent results from
level I studies. These studies provide a good estimate of
risk and are unlikely to be strongly affected by future
studies
Moderate The available evidence includes sufficient evidence to
determine that there is risk associated with the injury, but
confidence in the estimate is constrained by factors such as
the sample size and quality of studies, as well as inconsis-
tency of findings across individual studies. As more infor-
mation becomes available, the magnitude of risk could
change or even alter the conclusion
Low The available evidence is insufficient to assess risk. Evi-
dence is insufficient because of the limited number or size
of studies, and inconsistency of findings across individual
studies. More information may allow an estimation of riskDOI: 10.1080/00913847.2015.1077097 Risk factors for shoulder pain and injury in swimmers 413
Results and discussion
The article selection process is outlined in Figure 1. In total,
the 29 critically appraised articles identified 18 risk factors
for shoulder injuries in swimmers which are discussed below
and summarized in Table 3 and online Supplementary Table
S1. However, a further five risk factors were assigned a low
level of certainty as only a single supporting was available.
The risk factors identified from the systematic literature
search were categorized into four categories based on factors
identified during the review process, namely shoulder joint
anatomy and strength, activity history, demographics and
musculoskeletal anatomy.
Shoulder joint anatomy and strength
Internal/external rotation
Six studies investigated whether the internal/external rota-
tion was associated with shoulder pain in swimmers (see
online Supplementary Table S1). Three studies found an
association between internal/external rotation and shoulder
pain [5,8,23] and three studies found no association
[9,24,25]. In a prospective study by Walker et al. [8],
increased external range of motion and decreased internal
range of motion were associated with significant interferingshoulder pain and significant sho ulder injury, after adjusting
for swim training exposure. The study divided participants
into either low, mid or high external rotation range of
motion. The adjusted odds ratios indicated that swimmers in
both the low and high external rotation range of motion
groups were at increased risk of developing a shoulder
injury than those in the mid-range group. Similarly, a cross-
sectional study [5] reported a significant reduction in inter-
nal rotation range of motion in the 8- to 11-year-old
swimmers with shoulder pain compared with those
swimmers without pain. However, shoulder range of motion
was not associated with shoulder pain in any of the other
age groups examined (12 –14, 15 –18 and Masters). Further-
more, a cross-sectional study by Bansal et al. [23] found
that swimmers with shoulder impingement pain had signifi-
cantly decreased internal range of motion and a significantly
increased external range of motion compared with
swimmers without impingement pain. Although the term
impingement pain has been abandoned due to its generality
and poor correlation to what is occurring in the shoulder,
Bansal et al. [23] used specific criteria to diagnose impinge-
ment pain; this includes 1) history of exercise-related shoul-
der pain, 2) positive Neer ’s or Hawkins ’impingement test
a n d3 )p r e s e n c eo fa n yo ft h ef o l l o w i n g –painful arc,
tenderness at the greater tuberosity or bicipital groove,
953 titlesRound 1
Round 2311 abstracts
171 full texts
4 articles 98 articles
29 articlesPubmed: 643
articlesScience direct: 909
articles
2731 titles
440 titles
94 articles158 abstractsSpringerlink: 1179
articles
Figure 1. Schematic diagram of systematic review process. Initially, 2731 unique articles (1179 SpringerLink, 909 ScienceDirect and 643 PubMed)
were identified. Four-hundred and four, 158 and then 94 articles were identified after sequentially reviewing the titles, abstract and then the full text,
respectively. An additional four articles were included from the 953 unique references cited by the original 94 articles. Finally, 69 articles were
excluded from this review after inclusion criteria were applied. Therefore, 29 unique and original articles were included in this systematic review . Iden-
tified articles were grouped into specific risk factors.L. Hill et al. 414 Phys Sportsmed, 2015; 43 (4 ):412 –420
painful active contraction or any rotator cuff muscle. How-
ever, a case –control [9] and two cross-sectional studies
[ 2 4 , 2 5 ]f a i l e dt of i n das i g n ificant association between
shoulder range of motion and shoulder pain. Sample sizes
were however limited in these studies that failed to report
any association. In summary, there is sufficient evidence
that shoulder internal and external rotation range of motion
is a risk factor for shoulder pain in swimmers. The confi-
dence in the estimate is however constrained by factors such
as sample size, study quality and inconsistency of findings
across individual studies. Therefore, the level of certainty
that this risk factor is associated with shoulder pain is
moderate.
Clinical joint laxity and instability
Six studies examined whether there was an association
between clinical joint laxity and instability and shoulder pain.
Three studies found an association between clinical joint
laxity and instability and shoulder pain [5,23,26] and three
studies failed to show an association [8,27,28]. A cross-
sectional study by McMaster et al. [26] found a significant
correlation between a clinical shoulder exam score for joint
laxity and shoulder pain in elite swimmers who reported hav-
ing shoulder pain. Furthermore, Tate et al. [5] found that
shoulder pain was significantly associated with self-reported
shoulder instability in swimmers between the ages of 12 and
19 years old but not in Masters swimmers. In addition, the
cross-sectional study by Bansal et al. [23] found that atraumatic
anterior instability was significantly associated with shoulder
impingement pain in swimmers with impingement syndrome,
but multidirectional instability was not found to be significantly
associated with impingement pain. Bansal et al. [23] defined
atraumatic anterior instability as a positive apprehension sign
when the tested arm was abducted to 90 degrees and exter-
nally rotated. A positive test suggests that there is increased
anterior translation of the humeral head with concurrent
posterior capsule tightness leading to anterior instability.
Multidirectional instability is characterized as generalized
capsular laxity and is considered to be atraumatic. There is
therefore excessive mobility of the glenohumeral joint in all
directions (anterior, posterior, superior and inferior). The
tests used were the relocation test with a Sulcus sign and
this would constitute a positive test for multidirectional insta-
bility. However, two case –control studies [27,28] and a pro-
spective study [8] failed to show that shoulder joint laxity
was significantly associated with shoulder pain. In summary,
the available evidence suggests that joint laxity and instabil-
ity is a risk factor for shoulder pain in swimmers, but confi-
dence is constrained by the quality of studies, as well as
inconsistency of findings across individual studies. There-
fore, the level of certainty that this risk factor is associated
with shoulder pain is moderate.
Internal/external rotation strength
Five studies examined whether internal/external rotation
strength was associated with shoulder pain. Two studies
found an association between internal/external rotationstrength and shoulder pain [5,29] and three studies failed to
show an association [9,10,25]. A cross-sectional study [5]
reported that reduced internal rotation torque was associated
with shoulder pain and disability in swimmers with shoulder
pain. Although it does not provide evidence that decreased
internal/external rotation strength is a risk factor for injury,
a randomized control trial by Swanik et al. [29] found a
significant decrease in the incidence of shoulder pain
between the experimental group who underwent shoulder
functional training to strengt hen the internal and external
rotators compared with the control group. However, two
case–control studies [9,10] and a cross-sectional study [25]
f a i l e dt of i n da na s s o c i a t i o nb e t w e e ni n t e r n a la n de x t e r n a l
rotation strength and shoulder pain. In summary, due to
insufficient evidence, as well as inconsistency among the
available studies, the level o f certainty that internal and
external rotation strength is a risk factor for shoulder pain in
swimmers is low.
Shoulder flexibility
Three studies examined whether shoulder flexibility was
associated with shoulder pain. Two studies found an associa-
tion between shoulder flexibility and shoulder pain [30,31]
and one study didn ’t find an association [32]. In a prospective
study by Greipp [30], anterior shoulder inflexibility was
associated with shoulder pain in male and female swimmers.
Similarly, a case –control study by Ozcaldiran [31], found that
swimmers with shoulder pain had a significant positive corre-
lation between total flexibility index scores and shoulder
pain. However, there was no significant association between
swimmers who reported shoulder pain and subjective level of
joint flexibility in a cross-sectional study [32]. There is
currently a lack of evidence and consistency between findings
to suggest that shoulder flexibility is a risk factor for shoulder
pain in swimmers. The level of certainty that this risk factor
is associated with shoulder pain is therefore low.
Glenohumeral translation
Only two studies examined whether glenohumeral translation
was associated with shoulder pain. Both studies found no
association between glenohumeral translation and shoulder
pain [27,33]. In a case –control study by Borsa et al. [27], no
significant difference in glenohumeral joint displacement
between swimmers and controls was found. In addition, no
difference between joint displacement and swimmers with a
history of shoulder pain was found. Furthermore, in a ran-
domized intervention trial by Lynch et al. [33], a significant
decrease in forward shoulder translation and forward head
angle was found in the intervention group but not in the con-
trol group. In the intervention group, a significant increase in
shoulder girdle strength was found following the intervention.
However, no significant interaction was found in pain score
following the intervention and reduction of forward shoulder
translation and forward head angle. In summary, there is
currently insufficient evidence to suggest that glenohumeral
displacement is a risk factor for shoulder pain in swimmers;
therefore, the level of certainty is low.DOI: 10.1080/00913847.2015.1077097 Risk factors for shoulder pain and injury in swimmers 415
Activity history
Training load, volume and intensity
Ten studies examined whether training load, volume and
intensity was associated with shoulder pain. Four studies
found an association between training load, volume and inten-
sity and shoulder pain [5,12,34,35] and six studies didn ’t find
an association [4,8,25,36-38]. A cross-sectional MRI study by
Sein et al. [12] reported a significant correlation between train-
ing load (number of hours swum per week and weekly mile-
age) and increased risk of shoulder impingement pain. This
study also showed that supraspinatus tendon thickening was
significantly correlated with increased hours of training per
week, weekly mileage and cumulative shoulder use. Further-
more, two cross-sectional studies [5,34] showed that
swimmers who swam a greater number of hours and mileage
reported a significantly higher incidence of shoulder pain.
Moreover, the retrospective study by Ristolainen et al. [35]
showed that injured swimmers had reported swimming signifi-
cantly more during the 12-month period than the uninjured
swimmers and the mean number of kilometers swum was
higher in swimmers with at least one injury joint compared to
swimmers without an injury. However, the case –control study
by Su et al. [36] found no significant difference between prac-
tice duration (h/week) or practice distance (km/week) and
shoulder impingement and pain in swimmers. Additionally,
two recent prospective studies [4,8] reported that mileage and
hours of practice were not associated with shoulder pain.
Furthermore, two cross-sectional studies [39,38] also failed to
find a correlation between shoulder pain intensity and hours
per week of training. In summary, the studies which investi-
gated training load, volume and intensity as a risk factor for
shoulder pain are inconsistent. Therefore, the level of certainty
that this risk factor associated with shoulder pain is low.
Stroke distance and stroke specialty
Eight studies examined whether stroke distance and stroke
specialty was associated with shoulder pain. One study found
an association between stroke distance and stroke specialty
and shoulder pain [40] and seven studies found no associa-
tion [3,5,8,12,30,34,41]. It has been reported that of all
strokes, the butterfly stroke was the most likely to cause
shoulder pain in males and females [40]. However, in a pro-
spective study by Walker et al. [8] and a retrospective study
by Wolf et al. [3], stroke specialty or stroke distance were not
significantly associated with shoulder pain. Furthermore, four
cross-sectional studies [5,12,34,41] and a prospective study
[30] failed to find a significant association between stroke
specialty or stroke distance with shoulder pain in swimmers.
In summary, based on the available evidence it is unlikely
that stroke distance and stroke specialty is a risk factor for
shoulder pain in swimmers. Therefore, the level of certainty
that this factor is associated with shoulder pain is low.
Years of swimming experience
Six studies examined whether years of swimming experience
was associated with shoulder pain. Two studies found anassociation between years of swimming experience and
shoulder pain [5,12] and four found no association
[4,25,38,39]. In a cross-sectional MRI study by Sein et al.
[12], increased supraspinatus tendon thickness was associated
with years of swimming training experience demonstrated
impingement pain and supraspinatus tendon thickening. Fur-
thermore, a cross-sectional study by Tate et al. [5] found an
association between swimmers with shoulder pain and years
of swimming experience in 15- to 19-year-old swimmers, but
not in the other age groups studied. However, in a recent pro-
spective study by Chase et al. [4], years of swimming experi-
ence was not significantly associated with shoulder injury. In
addition, two further case –control studies [39,38] and a
cross –sectional study [25] also failed to find an association
between shoulder pain in swimmers and year of previous
swimming experience. In summary, since the available evi-
dence to assess years of swimming experience as a risk factor
for shoulder pain in swimmer is insufficient, the level of cer-
tainty that this factor is associated with shoulder pain is low.
Breathing side
Only two studies examined whether breathing side was associ-
ated with pain. One study found an association between breath-
ing side and shoulder pain [5] an one found no association [32].
In a cross-sectional study by Tate et al. [5], bilateral breathing
in the 8 to 11-year-old age group was found to be associated
with shoulder pain but no associations were found in breathing
side preference in the other age groups (12 –14, 15 –18 and
Masters). Further, a cross-sectional study by Stocker et al. [32]
failed to find a significant association between breathing side
and shoulder pain in competitive collegiate and masters level
swimmer. There is inconsistent and insufficient evidence that
breathing side is a risk factor for shoulder pain in swimmers
and therefore the level of certainty is low.
Swimming training equipment
Four studies examined whether swimming training equipment
was associated with shoulder pain. Only one study found an
association between swimming training equipment and shoul-
der pain [40] and three studies found no association
[5,32,42]. In a cross-sectional study by McMaster et al. [40],
the use of hand paddles and kickboards were found to be
significantly associated with shoulder pain in both male and
female swimmers with shoulder pain. In three subsequent
cross-sectional studies [5,32,42], the use of hand paddles
were not significantly associated with shoulder pain or injury.
In summary, there is no evidence that training equipment
increases the risk of shoulder pain in swimmers. Therefore,
the level of certainty that this risk factor is associated with
shoulder pain is low.
Cross training and stretching
Four studies examined whether cross training and stretching
was associated with shoulder pain. Two studies found an
association between cross training and stretching and shoul-
der pain [30,40] and two studies found no association [8,34].L. Hill et al. Phys Sportsmed, 2015; 43 (4 ):412 416 –420
In a prospective study [30], increased weight training was
associated with increased shoulder pain in male swimmers.
Furthermore, increased stretching in both males and females
was associated with increased incidence of shoulder pain in a
cross-sectional study [40]. Additionally, shoulder pain was
associated with strength training and weight training for both
groups. However, in a prospective study by Walker et al. [8],
the number of dry-land strength training sessions per week
was not significantly associated with shoulder pain. More-
over, a cross-sectional study by Kru €ger et al. [34] found that
strength training was not associated with shoulder pain or
injury. In summary, there is insufficient evidence and incon-
sistent findings among the individual studies to suggest that
cross training and stretching is a risk factor for shoulder pain
in swimmers. Therefore, the level of certainty that this risk
factor is associated with shoulder pain is low.
Demographics
Previous history of pain and injury
Four studies examined whether history of previous pain and
injury was associated with shoulder pain. Three studies found
an association between previous history of pain and injury
and shoulder pain [5,8,23] and one study found no associa-
tion [34]. In a prospective study by Walker et al. [8],
swimmers with a history of shoulder pain were 4.1 and
11.3 times more likely to sustain a subsequent injury for sig-
nificant interfering pain in the shoulder and a significant
shoulder injury, respectively. A cross-sectional study by
Tate et al. [5] found that previous history of pain or injury
was significantly associated with shoulder pain in high school
swimmers and masters ’level swimmers. Moreover,
Bansal et al. [23] found a strong association between past
history of shoulder pain and shoulder impingement syndrome.
However, in a cross-sectional study by Kru €ger et al. [34], no
association between previous history of injury and shoulder
pain was found. In summary, there is sufficient evidence from
both a level I and two level III studies to determine that previ-
ous history of pain and injury is a risk factor for shoulder
pain in swimmers. However, due to the inconsistent findings,
and lack of repeated level I studies, there is only a moderate
certainty that this risk factor is associated with shoulder pain.
Sex
Five studies examined whether sex was associated with
shoulder pain. Only one study found an association between
sex and shoulder pain [43] and four found no association
[4,30,34,36]. A retrospective study by Sallis et al. [43]
reported that female swimmers had significantly more shoul-
der injuries than the male swimmers. However, a prospective
study by Chase et al. [4] failed to find a significant difference
in injury rates between male and female swimmers over the
course of a competitive season. Furthermore, in a prospective
study [30], a cross-sectional study [34] and a case –control
study [36], it was found that sex was not significantly associ-
ated with shoulder pain or injury. In summary, there is insuf-
ficient evidence and inconsistencies among the individualstudies, to suggest that sex is a risk factor for shoulder pain
in swimmers. Therefore, the level of certainty that gender is a
risk factor for shoulder pain is low.
Age
Seven studies examined whether age was associated with
shoulder pain. All seven studies found no association
between age and shoulder pain [4,5,8,25,30,34,36]. In a pro-
spective study by Greipp [30], the incidence of shoulder pain
was not significantly associated with age. Similarly, the case –
control study by Su et al. [36] found that age was not signifi-
cantly different between swimmers with impingement and
those without. More recently, two cross-sectional studies
found no significant association with age of the swimmers
and the incidence of shoulder pain [5,34]. In summary, there
is currently no evidence that age is a risk factor for shoulder
pain in swimmers and its certainty is therefore low.
Competitive level
Four studies examined whether competitive level was associ-
ated with shoulder pain. Three studies found an association
between shoulder pain and competitive level [12,34,44] and
one study found no association [36]. In a description of elite
and recreational swimmers [44], the elite group was found to
have significantly higher incidence of shoulder overuse dys-
function and pain than the recreational group. In addition, the
cross-sectional MRI study by Sein et al. [12] found that com-
petitive level was significantly associated with supraspinatus
thickness and impingement pain and that athletes at higher
levels of competition were more likely to have supraspinatus
thickness and impingement pain than those at lower levels.
Furthermore, the cross-sectional study by Kru €ger et al. [34]
reported that competitive swimmers were found to have
significantly higher incidence of shoulder pain compared with
recreational swimmers. The case –control study by Su et al.
[36] did not report an association, however only 20 injured
swimmers were investigated and this study was not designed
to investigate this risk factor. In summary, the available evi-
dence is sufficient to conclude that competitive swimming, as
appose to recreational swimming, is a risk factor for develop-
ing shoulder pain. Therefore, the level of certainty that this
risk factor associated with shoulder pain is moderate.
Musculoskeletal
Scapular kinematics, strength and dyskinesis
Three studies examined whether scapular kinematics, strength
and dyskinesis was associated with shoulder pain. Only one
study found an association between scapular kinematics,
strength and dyskinesis and shoulder pain [36] and two stud-
ies found no association [5,25]. In a study of 20 swimmers
with shoulder impingement and 20 healthy swimmers without
history of shoulder pain [36]; shoulder impingement was
significantly associated with reduced strength during the
scapular strength test after swimming. In addition, swimmers
with shoulder impingement also demonstrated less upwardDOI: 10.1080/00913847.2015.1077097 Risk factors for shoulder pain and injury in swimmers 417
rotation at 45, 90 and 135 degrees of humeral elevation dur-
ing arm abduction after swim training. Conversely, in the
cross-sectional study by Harrington et al. [25], scapular
depression, abduction and adduction strength were not signif-
icantly associated with shoulder pain. Further, the frequency
of obvious scapular dyskinesis was not found to be different
between the swimmers who had shoulder pain and those that
had no shoulder pain in any age group [5]. In summary, the
evidence supporting scapular kinematics, strength and dyski-
nesis as a risk factor for shoulder pain in swimmers is insuffi-
cient and therefore the level of certainty that this risk factor is
associated with shoulder pain is low.
Core stability
Only two studies examined whether core stability was associ-
ated with shoulder pain. One study found an association
between core stability and shoulder pain [5] and one study
found no association [25]. In a cross-sectional study by
Tate et al. [5], it was reported that youth swimmers
(12–14 years old) with shoulder pain maintained a side
bridge for significantly less time than uninjured swimmers.
There was however no significant differences found in other
age groups and between other tests of core stability (prone
bridge and close kinetic chain bridge). A further study by
Harrington et al. [25] found no association between side
bridge and prone bridge endurance and shoulder pain. In
summary, the evidence available on trunk muscle endurance
as a risk factor for shoulder pain in swimmers is insufficient.
Therefore, the level of certainty that this risk factor is
associated with shoulder pain is low.
Pectoral length
Only two studies examined whether pectoral length was asso-
ciated with shoulder pain. Both studies found an association
between pectoral length and shoulder pain [5,25]. It has beendemonstrated by Borstad and Ludewig [45] that a short pec-
toralis minor demonstrated scapular kinematics similar to the
kinematics exhibited in earlier studies by subjects with shoul-
der impingement. These results support the theory that an
adaptively short pectoralis minor may influence scapular kine-
matics and is therefore a potential mechanism for subacromial
impingement. In a cross-sectional study by Tate et al. [5],
a significant association was found in the resting normalized
pectoralis minor length (normalized to clavicle length) at rest
in the 15-year-old age group of girls with shoulder pain but
not in any of the other age groups. Additionally, no associa-
tions were found during pectoralis minor stretch and shoulder
pain in any of the age categories. Furthermore, the cross-
sectional study by Harrington et al. [25] found that pectoralis
length at rest and at stretch was significantly associated with
shoulder pain in Division I female swimmers. In summary,
there is currently inconsistent evidence that pectoralis length
is a risk factor for shoulder pain in swimmers; therefore, the
level of certainty that this risk factor is associated with shoul-
der pain is low.
Conclusion
The investigation of risk factors is an important initial step
towards the understanding of the etiology of shoulder injuries
in swimmers. Although, a number of risk factors were identi-
fied in the included studies, poor study methodology or lim-
ited available data caused constrained estimation of injury risk
to the shoulder for almost all of the investigated risk factors.
None of the identified risk factors were found to have a high
level of certainty. Prospective cohort design and consistency
of measurements of risk should be employed in future studies.
Additionally, risk factors that were only investigated by a
single study are assigned a low level of certainty as there is
insufficient evidence to make a conclusion and require future
investigation. These risk factors include: swimming scholar-
ship status [3],inadequate treatment [23], triceps length [5],
latissimus length [5] and internal/external rotation endurance
[24]. Furthermore, some studies have suggested that changes
in EMG activation of shoulder stability muscles are associated
with shoulder pain during swimming [28,39,46-48]. However,
further investigation is required in order to determine whether
the changes in EMG activation shoulder stability muscles are
a possible cause of shoulder pain in swimmers or that shoulder
pain modifies EMG activation. Finally, some studies have sug-
gested that a genetic predisposition to shoulder injury exists
[49], however; no studies have investigated this in swimmers.
It is therefore possible to suggest that overuse injuries in
swimmers who have an already high volume of arm rotations
may in some way be at additional risk for shoulder injury.
Limitations
There were several limitations to this systematic review.
There was a clear lack of consistency of the definition of
shoulder pain or injury. A number of studies utilized self-
reported pain without an objective diagnosis of pathology.
Additionally, several aspects of one shoulder pathology were
investigated which may weaken the significance of factorsTable 5. Summary of the level of certainty of risk factors associated
with shoulder injuries in swimmers.
Level of certainty
High Moderate Low
_ Clinical joint laxity and
instabilityYears of swimming experience
Internal/external rotation Training load, volume and intensity
Previous history of pain
and injuryGender
Competitive level Age
Swimming training equipment
Stroke distance and stroke specialty
Breathing side
Internal/external rotation strength
Scapular strength
Scapular dyskinesis
Core stability
Glenohumeral translation
Swimming scholarship status
Pectoral length
Tricep length
Latissimus length
Inadequate treatment
Shoulder flexibilityL. Hill et al. 418 Phys Sportsmed, 2015; 43 (4 ):412 –420
with only a single supporting study. Therefore, it is possible
that a single risk factor for shoulder pain such as scapular
rotation may possibly be nullified as a risk factor as it doesn ’t
show a correlation with scapular dyskinesis. Secondly, some
studies were excluded because they were unavailable or in a
foreign language. Finally, the systematic review was limited
by the quality of studies available, as the majority of studies
were case –control or cross-sectional in study design.
This evidence-based systematic review provides descrip-
tive analysis of several risk factors for shoulder injury in
swimmers. Although the identified risk factors did not
achieve a high level of certainty, several of the risk factors
were moderately associated with shoulder pain and injury in
swimming. In order to improve the definition and etiology of
shoulder injuries in swimmers, more high-quality studies are
required to improve the inconsistency of results. Finally, a
shoulder injury can potentially be a career ending happen-
stance, thus, an understanding of the factors that predispose a
swimmer to shoulder injury can improve the quality of train-
ing, reduce injury rates and prolong a career.
Declaration of interest
The financial assistance of the National Research Foundation
(NRF) towards this research is hereby acknowledged. Opin-
ions expressed and conclusions arrived at, are those of the
authors and are not necessarily to be attributed to the NRF.
The authors have no other relevant affiliations or financial
involvement with any organization or entity with a financial
interest in or financial conflict with the subject matter or mate-
rials discussed in the manuscript apart from those disclosed.
References
[1] Kerr ZY, Baugh CM, Hibberd EE, Snook EM, Hayden R,
Dompier TP. Epidemiology of National Collegiate Athletic Associ-
ation men ’s and women ’s swimming and diving injuries from
2009/2010 to 2013/2014. Br J Sports Med 2015;465 –71.
[2] Lord C. Aquatics 1908-2008: FINA - 100 years of excellence in
sport. FINA; Lausanne, Switzerland: 2008.
[3] Wolf BR, Ebinger AAE, Lawler MP, Britton CL. Injury patterns in
Division I collegiate swimming. Am J Sports Med 2009;37:2037 –
42.
[4] Chase KI, Caine DJ, Goodwin BJ, Whitehead JR, Romanick MA.
A prospective study of injury affecting competitive collegiate
swimmers. Res Sports Med 2013;21:111 –23.
[5] Tate A, Turner GN, Knab SE, Jorgensen C, Strittmatter A ML.
Risk factors associated with shoulder pain and disability across the
lifespan of competitive swimmers. J Athl Train 2012;47:149 –58.
[6] McMaster WC. Shoulder injuries in competitive swimmers. Clin
Sports Med 1999. 18(2):349 –59, vii Available from http://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10230570.
[7] Weldon EJ, Richardson AB. Upper extremity overuse injuries in
swimming. A discussion of swimmer ’s shoulder. Clin Sport Med
2001. 20(3):423 –38. Available from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/11494832.
[8] Walker H, Gabbe B, Wajswelner H, Blanch P, Bennell K. Physical
Therapy in Sport Shoulder pain in swimmers: A 12-month prospec-
tive cohort study of incidence and risk factors. Phys Ther Sport
2012;13:243 –9.
[9] Rupp S, Berninger K, Hopf T. Shoulder problems in high level
swimmers –impingement, anterior instability, muscular imbalance?
Int J Sport Med 1955;16:557 –62.
[10] Bak K, Magnusson S. Shoulder strength and range of motion in
symptomatic and pain-free elite swimmers. Am J Sport Med
1997;25:454 –9.[11] Fredericson M, Ho C, Waite B, Jennings F, Peterson J, Williams C,
et al. Magnetic resonance imaging abnormalities in the shoulder and
wrist joints of asymptomatic elite athletes. PM R 2009;1:107 –16.
[12] Sein ML, Walton J, Linklater J, Appleyard R, Kirkbride B,
Kuah D, et al. Shoulder pain in elite swimmers: primarily due to
swim-volume-induced supraspinatus tendinopathy. Br J Sports Med
2008;44:105 –13.
[13] Kennedy JC, Hawkins RJ. Swimmers Shoulder. Phys Sport
1974;2:34 –8.
[14] McMaster WC, Troup J. A survey of interfering shoulder pain in
United States competitive swimmers. Am J Sports Med 1993. 21
(1):67 –70. Available from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/
8427371.
[15] Allegrucci M, Whitney SL, Irrgang JJ. Clinical implications of sec-
ondary impingement of the shoulder in freestyle swimmers.
J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 1994. 20(6):307 –18. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7849751.
[16] Pollard H, Croker D. Shoulder pain in elite swimmers. Australas
Chiropr Osteopathy 1999. 8(3):91 –5. Available from http://www.
pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?
artid=2051095&tool =pmcentrez&rendertype =abstract.
[17] Obremskey WT, Pappas N, Attallah-Wasif E, Tornetta P,
Bhandari M. Level of evidence in orthopaedic journals. J Bone Jt
Surgery 2005;87-A:2632 –8.
[18] Sawaya GF, Guiruis-Blake J, Harris R, Petitti D. US. Preventive
Services Task Force. Update on the methods of the U.S. Preventive
Services Task Force: estimating certainty and magnitude of net
benefit. Ann Intern Med 2007;147:871 –5.
[19] Liberati A, Altman DG, Tetzlaff J, Mulrow C, Gøtzsche PC,
Ioannidis JPA, et al. The PRISMA statement for reporting systematic
reviews and meta-analyses of studies that evaluate health care inter-
ventions: explanation and elaboration. PLoS Med 2009;6:e1000100.
[20] Wright RW, Brand RA, Dunn W, Spindler KP. How to write a sys-
tematic review. Clin Orthop Relat Res 2007;455:23 –9.
[21] Abrahams S, Fie SM, Patricios J, Posthumus M, September A V.
Risk factors for sports concussion: an evidence-based systematic
review. Br J Sports Med 2014;48:91 –7.
[22] Posthumus M, Collins M, September AV, Schwellnus MP. The
intrinsic risk factors for ACL ruptures: an evidence-based review.
Phys Sportsmed 2011;39:62 –73.
[23] Bansal S, Gaurang A, Sinha K, Sandhu JS. Shoulder impingement
syndrome among competitive swimmers in India –prevalence. J
Exerc Sci Fit 2007;5(2):102 –8.
[24] Beach ML, Whitney SL, Dickoff-Hoffman S. Relationship of
shoulder flexibility, strength, and endurance to shoulder pain in
competitive swimmers. J Orthop Sport Phys Ther 1992;16:262 –8.
[25] Harrington S, Meisel C, Tate A. A. Cross Sectional Study Examin-
ing Shoulder Pain and Disability in Division I Female Swimmers.
J Sport Rehabil 2014;23:65 –75.
[26] McMaster WC, Roberts A, Stoddard T. A correlation between
shoulder laxity and interfering pain in competitive swimmers. Am
J Sports Med 1998;26:83 –6. Available from http://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pubmed/9474407.
[27] Borsa PA, Scibek JS, Jacobson JA, Meister K. Sonographic stress
measurement of glenohumeral joint laxity in collegiate swimmers
and age-matched controls. Am J Sports Med 2005;33:1077 –84.
[28] Santos MJ, Belangero WD, Almeida GL. The effect of joint insta-
bility on latency and recruitment order of the shoulder muscles.
J Electromyogr Kinesiol 2007;17:167 –75.
[29] Swanik KA, Lephart SM, Swanik CB, Lephart SP, Stone DA,
Fu FH. The effects of shoulder plyometric training on propriocep-
tion and selected muscle performance characteristics. J Shoulder
Elb Surg 2002;11:579 –86.
[30] Greipp J. Swimmer ’s Shoulder: The influence of flexibility and
weight training. Phys Sport 1985;13:92 –105.
[31] Ozcaldiran B. A relation between static flexibility and shoulder pain
in competitive age group swimmers. Pain Clin 2002;14:159 –63.
[32] Stocker D, Pink M, Jobe F. Comparison of shoulder injury in
collegiate-and master ’s-level swimmers. Clin J Sport Med 1995;
Available from http://journals.lww.com/cjsportsmed/Abstract/1995/
01000/Comparison_of_Shoulder_Injury_in_Collegiate__and.2.
aspx. [Last accessed May 18, 2013.
[33] Lynch SS, Thigpen CA, Mihalik JP, Prentice WE, Padua D. The
effects of an exercise intervention on forward head and roundedDOI: 10.1080/00913847.2015.1077097 Risk factors for shoulder pain and injury in swimmers 419
shoulder postures in elite swimmers. Br J Sports Med
2010;44:376 –81.
[34] Kru €ger PE, Dressler A, Botha M. Incidence of shoulder injuries
and related risk factors among master swimmers in South Africa.
African J Phys Heal Educ Recreat Danc 2012(Suppl):57 –76.
[35] Ristolainen L, Kettunen JA, Waller B, Heinonen A, Kujala UM.
Training-related risk factors in the etiology of overuse injuries in
endurance sports. J Sport Med Phys Fit 2014;54:78 –87.
[36] Su KPE, Johnson MP, Gracely EJ, Karduna AR. Scapular Rotation
in Swimmers with and without Impingement Syndrome: Practice
Effects. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2004;36:1117 –23.
[37] Hidalgo-Lozano A, Caldero /C19n-Soto C, Domingo-Camara A, Fernán-
dez-de-Las-Peñas C, Madeleine P, Arroyo-Morales M. Elite
swimmers with unilateral shoulder pain demonstrate altered pattern
of cervical muscle activation during a functional upper-limb task.
J Orthop Sport Phys Ther 2012;42:552 –8.
[38] Hidalgo-Lozano A, Fernández-de-las-Peñas C, Caldero /C19n-Soto C,
Domingo-Camara A, Madeleine P, Arroyo-Morales M. Elite
swimmers with and without unilateral shoulder pain: mechanical
hyperalgesia and active/latent muscle trigger points in neck-
shoulder muscles. Scand J Med Sci Sport 2013;23:66 –73.
[39] Hidalgo-Lozano A. Elite swimmers with unilateral shoulder pain
demonstrate altered pattern of cervical muscles activation during a
functional upper limb task. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther
2012;42:552 –9.
[40] McMaster WC, Troup JP, Arrendondo S. The incidence of shoulder
problems in developing elite swimmers. J Swim Res 1989;5:11 –16.
[41] Wymore L, Reeve RE, Chaput CD. No correlation between stroke
specialty and rate of shoulder pain in NCAA men swimmers. Int J
Shoulder Surg 2012;6:71 –5.[42] Puckree T, Thomas KJ. Shoulder injuries in competitive swimmers
in KwaZulu-Natal. South African J Sport Med 2006;18:10 –12.
[43] Sa llis RE, Jones K, Sunshine S, Smith G, Simon L. Comparing
sports injuries in men and women. Int J Sports Med
2001;22:420 –3.
[44] Zemek MJ, Magee DJ. Comparison of glenohumeral joint laxity in
elite and recreational swimmers. Clin J Sport Med 1996;6:40 –7.
[45] Borstad JD, Ludwig PM. Comparison of three stretches for the pec-
toralis minor muscle. J Shoulder Elbow Surg 2006;15(1):324 –30.
[46] Scovazzo ML, Browne A, Pink M, Jobe FW, Kerrigan J. The pain-
ful shoulder during freestyle swimming. An electromyographic cin-
ematographic analysis of twelve muscles. Am J Sport Med
1991;19:577 –82.
[47] Ruwe PA, Pink M, Jobe FW, Perry J, Scovazzo ML, Ruwe P,
Pink M, et al. The normal and the painful shoulders during the
breaststroke. Electromyographic and cinematographic analysis of
twelve muscles. Am J Sport Med 1994;22:789 –96. Available from
http://ajs.sagepub.com/content/22/6/789.short. [Last accessed May
18, 2013.
[48] Wadsworth DJ, Bullock-Saxton JE. Recruitment patterns of the
scapular rotator muscles in freestyle swimmers with subacromial
impingement. Int J Sport Med 1997;18:618 –24.
[49] Motta GDR, Amaral MV , Rezende E, Pitta R, Vieira TC,
Duarte ME, et al. Evidence of genetic variations associated with
rotator cuff disease. J Shoulder Elb Surg 2014;23:227 –35.
Supplementary material available online.
Supplementary Table S1.L. Hill et al. 420 Phys Sportsmed, 2015; 43 (4 ):412 –420
