. .. -7-R.'E. .* - STUDY 
Relationship of Shoulder Flexibility, Strength, 
and Endurance to Shoulder Pain in 
Competitive Swimmers 
Mary Lee Beach, MS, PT' 
Susan I. Whitney, PhD, MS, PT, ATC2 
Steven A. Dickoff-Hoffman, MS, PT, ATC3 
he swim season for the 
competitive swimmer 
lasts 10- 12 months 
per year. Competitive 
swimmers practice 5-7 
days 1x1. week, with twice daily 
workouts during midseason training. 
The reported average yardage for 
midseason swimmers is 8,000 to 
20,000 yds per day (2, 20, 26). 
Counsilman (5) proposed a 4: 1 ratio 
of running to swimming, in which 4 
miles of running are exertionally 
equivalent to 1 mile of swimming. 
Therefore, the average swimming 
yardage would be equivalent to run- 
ning more than 45 miles per dav. 
The competitive swimmer will 
also weight train a minimum of three 
times per week. Common weight 
training consists of free weights, 
NautilusR (Nautilus, Independence, 
VA, 24348), and a swim bench, 
which emphasizes internal rotation 
and shoulder extension (2, 8, 18, 2 1, 
2.5). This intensity of training places 
the conlpetitive swimmer at risk of 
developing n~usculoskeletal injuries. 
Although there are four strokes 
in competitive swimming (freestyle, 
butterfly, backstroke, breaststroke), 
80% of practice time is spent per- 
forming the freestyle stroke. This 
percentage is independent of the 
swimmer's specialty stroke, and, 
therefore, the freestyle stroke is the 
emphiisis of this study (8, 19, 25). A common complaint of competitive swimmers is shoulder pain. The purposes of this study 
were to: 1) provide normative data on shoulder flexibility in swimmers, 2) determine if a correlation 
exists between flexibility and shoulder pain, and 3) determine the correlation between strength and 
endurance ratios to shoulder pain. The subjects were 28 Division I collegiate swimmers and four 
club swimmers. Shoulder flexibility measurements were obtained bilaterally using a universal goni- 
ometer. Strength and endurance ratios were obtained bilaterally using the Cybex I$ isokinetic 
dynamometer and the Upper Body Exercise Table? The swimmers completed a questionnaire that 
included a shoulder pain performance scale. The Pearson product moment correlation coefficient 
and multiple regression (R) analysis were the applied statistics. The results demonstrated that no 
significant correlation (p > 0.00 1) existed between shoulder flexibility, strength ratios, and shoulder 
pain. There was a significant (p 5 0.001) negative Pearson's correlation between endurance ratios of 
external rotation, abduction, and shoulder pain in competitive swimmers. A multiple R of 0.78 was 
obtained for the combination of external rotation and abduction endurance ratios to shoulder pain, 
which was significant (p I 0.00 1). Clinical implications suggest that when evaluating swimmers, 
clinicians need to be aware of the importance of assessing the endurance ratios of the shoulder 
abductors and the external rotators at faster speeds. With decreased endurance ratios, competitive 
swimmers may be more likely to develop shoulder pain. 
Key Words: swimmer, muscle strength, flexibility 
' Associate, Metro Physical Therapy, Inc., 1501 locust Street, Suite C-8, Pittsburgh, PA 15219. At the time this 
research was conducted, Ms. Beach was a master's candidate in the sports physical therapy track, University of 
Pittsburgh, PA. ' Assistant professor, Department of Physical Therapy, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA ' Director of Sports Medicine, North Hills Sports Medicine Center, Pittsburgh, PA 
This study was supported in part by the School of Health Related Professions Research and Development 
Fund, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA. 
A common conlplaint of compet- 
itive swimmers is shoulder pain. The 
incidence of shoulder pain in com- 
petitive swimmers ranges from 40- 
80% (2, 8, 26). A number of articles 
have been written discussing the two 
most common contributing factors in 
swimmers' shoulder pain-flexibility 
and muscle imbalances between the 
internal and external rotators (1 2, 
14, 18, 20, 21, 26). However, the literature is limited in demonstrating 
any type of correlation between 
these contributing factors and shoul- 
der pain in competitive swimmers. 
Although training techniques have 
greatly improved in the past 10 
years, the incidence of shoulder pain 
in swimmers has not declined (1 8). 
Researchers have stated that the 
primary cause of shoulder pain in 
swimmers is impingement of the ro- 
Volume 16 Number 6 December 1992 *JOSPT 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on August 12, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 1992 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.

RESEARCH STUDY 
tator cuff, biceps tendon, subdeltoid 
bursa, and subacromial bursa under 
the coracoacromial arch (2.9, 20, 
22). The mechanism of injury is be- 
lieved to be a result of repetitive 
stress, overuse, and improper stroke 
mechanics (2, 9, 21, 23). 
Discrepancies in the literature 
exist regarding flexibility and its role 
in shoulder injury (I 1, 14, 18, 21, 
26). Some authors (I I, 14, 18, 26) 
have suggested that a lack of shoul- 
der flexibility in swimmers contrib- 
utes to shoulder injury. On the other 
hand, McMaster (2 1) discussed the 
influence of hyperflexibility in swim- 
mers, which may cause a multitude 
of shoulder problems. Only one au- 
thor has shown objective documenta- 
tion for his/her opinion on swim- 
mers' excessive/limited shoulder 
flexibility (14). The data collected by 
Greipp (1 4) were limited to one 
measurement of the anterior shoul- 
der compartment. He was able to 
predict at a 90% accuracy rate at 
which swimmers, based on their pre- 
season shoulder flexibility measure- 
ment, would develop shoulder pain 
during that swim season. 
Several studies have compared 
shoulder internal/external rotation 
strength ratios of baseball players 
and nonathletes at 60, 180, and 
240°/sec (3, 4, 16, 23, 29). The ob- 
tained unilateral antagonistic ratios 
were 3:2 for internal rota- 
tion:external rotation and 2: 1 for ad- 
duction:abduction across a velocity 
spectrum. There was no significant 
difference between the dominant 
and nondominant arm or the speed 
of testing. In these studies, the test 
position was supine for internal/ex- 
ternal strength ratios. One of two 
known studies to test swimmers' in- 
ternal/external rotation strength ra- 
tios was completed by Falkel et al 
(1 1). He tested the swimmers prone 
to mimic specificity in sports testing 
and achieved greater torque produc- 
tion in the prone position compared 
with supine. Beasley's (I) study sup 
ported the preliminary work of Fal- 
kel et al (I l). She found that exter- nal to internal rotator concentric ra- 
tios at 60°/sec tested in the prone 
position were significantly greater (p 
< 0.05) for swimmers compared to 
nonathletes. Falkel and Murphy (1 2), 
in an unpublished follow-up study, 
reported on "endurance ratios" for 
external rotators vs. internal rota- 
tors. Their results showed endur- 
ance of 67.8% for external/internal 
rotation in nonswimmers, 56.1 % in 
swimmers without shoulder pain, 
and 42.0% in swimmers with shoul- 
der pain (12). The need for further 
research is apparent. 
The purposes of this study were 
to: 1) provide normative data on 
elite swimmers' shoulder flexibility, 
2) determine if a correlation exists 
between excessive or limited flexibil- 
ity and shoulder pain, 3) determine 
Eighty percent of 
practice time is spent 
performing the 
freestyle stroke. 
the correlation coefficient between 
external/internal and abductionlad- 
duction strength ratios to shoulder 
pain, and 4) determine the endur- 
ance ratios for 50 repetitions of in- 
ternal rotation, external rotation, 
and abduction and adduction, and 
their correlation to shoulder pain. 
The null hypothesis for this study 
was that no correlation existed be- 
tween shoulder flexibility, shoulder 
strength, or endurance ratios and 
pain experienced by swimmers. 
METHOD 
Subjects 
Thirty-two swimmers volun- 
teered to participate in this study. 
Seven males and 2 1 females were 
members of the University of Pitts- 
burgh Division I Swimming team. One male and three females were 
club swimmers (three of the club 
swimmers would be competing for a 
Division I team and the fourth swim- 
mer was a 15-year-old Junior Olym- 
pic qualifier). The swimmers were all 
accepted into the study without 
screening for prior or present shoul- 
der injury. One individual was ex- 
cluded from the study secondary to 
recent shoulder surgery and lack of 
medical clearance. The University of 
Pittsburgh intercollegiate swimmers 
who volunteered for this study were 
accepted regardless of their current 
level of shoulder symptoms because 
swimmers frequently practice with 
shoulder pain. Therefore, the intent 
was to test all swimmers, regardless 
of their present level of shoulder 
pain. Seventy percent of the Univer- 
sity of Pittsburgh male swim team 
and 91 % of the female swim team 
participated in this study. The age 
range was 15-2 1, and the mean was 
19 for both males and females. The 
participants signed an informed con- 
sent according to the regulations of 
the Biomedical Interna! Review 
Board of the University of 
Pittsburgh. 
Procedure 
A questionnaire adapted from 
the United States Swimming Associa- 
tion (28) was completed by all partic- 
ipants (Table 1). Attached to the 
questionnaire was a modified version 
of the shoulder pain performance 
scale established by Greipp (14) 
(Table 2). 
After completing the question- 
naire, each subjects' shoulder flexi- 
bility was tested in the supine posi- 
tion using a universal goniometer. 
The lower extremities were flexed 
bilaterally to maintain the spine in a 
neutral position (1 0) (Figure 1). 
Standard goniometric tests were per- 
formed for active internal/external 
rotation measured at 90" of shoul- 
der abduction (I 0. 13, 19). Active 
horizontal abduction and adduction 
were measured with shoulder flexion 
JOSPT Volume 16 Number 6 December 1992 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on August 12, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 1992 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.

RESEARCH STUDY 
1. At what age did you first swim competitively? 
2. List 100 and 200 times you swim, with current 
best times. 
3. How many workouts per week do you partici- 
pate in now? 
4. How many yards per day do you swim in 
workouts? 
5. How many months will you train this year? 
6. Have you ever stretched before workouts? 
7. At what age did you first start stretching? 
8. Do you stretch before workouts now? 
9. If sometimes, how often? 
10. Have you ever used surgical tubing to stretch? 
11. Do you now use surgical tubing to stretch? 
12. If yes, how often? 
13. If yes, for how long? 
14. Have you ever used weight training in your 
workouts? 
15. Do you use weight training in your workouts 
? 
1 
1 
1 
1 
20. At what age did you t~rst begln us~ng welgnrs! 
21. Have you ever used hand paddles in work- 
outs? 
22. Do you use hand paddles in your workouts 
now? 
23. Have you ever experienced shoulder pain? 
24. Do you have shoulder pain now? (such that 
your training has been altered) 
25. If yes, how long have you had shoulder pain? 
TABLE 1. United States Swimming Sports Medicine 
Shoulder Pain Questionnaire. (Adapted from Troop 
(28), with permission). 
Please circle the number that corresponds to your 
present shoulder pain level: 
No pain 
Occasional shoulder pain which lasts less than 
two hours. No problem. 
Shoulder pain lasting longer than 2 hours fol- 
lowing swim practice. 
Shoulder pain experienced on forceful arm 
movements. 
Shoulder pain which is annoying for perhaps 
eight hours a day. Could have affected my 
practice abilities. 
Pain was very annoying. Almost certainly af- 
fected my ability to practice hard. 
Severe shoulder pain, lasting at least 12 hours 
a day (unless I used ice, medication, etc). 
Almost impossible to practice hard. 
TABLE 2. Swimmer's Shoulder Pain Scale. (Adapted 
from Creipp (14), with permission). FIGURE 1. Coniometric test position lor external 
rotation. 
to 90". the forearm in the neutral 
position, and the elbow extended. 
The position for active shoulder 
flexion was with the palm of the 
hand facing upward and the elbow 
extended with the arm over the side 
of the table. Active shoulder abduc- 
tion was assessed with the scapula 
supported on the table, the elbow 
extended, and the palm facing up 
ward (1 0). The end point was deter- 
mined by the swimmer's maximal ac- 
tive range precluding observable 
substitution. One bilateral measure- 
ment of each of the following active 
motions was recorded: shoulder flex- 
ion, extension, abduction, horizontal 
abduction, horizontal adduction and 
internal and external rotation (1 0, 
13. 19). An intratester reliability 
coefficient of 0.95 was established in 
a pilot study using 42 physical ther- 
apy students and the same proce- 
dures for the shoulder flexibility 
measurements. 
Following the flexibility meas- 
urements, strength was tested with a 
Cybex II@ (Cybex Division of Lu- 
mex, Inc, Ronkonkoma, NY, 1 1799) 
isokinetic dynamometer, an Upper 
Body Extremity Testing Tablem and 
the Cybex Data Reduction Com- 
puter. One of many definitions for 
strength is the ability of a muscle 
group to exert a force about an axis. 
For the purpose of this study, the 
parameter to indicate strength was 
peak torque. Strength (peak torque) 
ratios were obtained for externallin- 
ternal rotation and abduction/adduc- 
tion at 60" sec and endurance ratios for 50 repetitions at 240°/sec, ac- 
cording to the manufacturer's rec- 
ommendations (7). The strength 
decrement (endurance ratio) was cal- 
culated by dividing the mean of the 
peak torque for the last three con- 
tractions by the mean of the peak 
torque for the first three contrac- 
tions x 100. The 240°/sec was se- 
lected as an appropriate sport-spe- 
cific speed based on the following 
mathematical equation: 
O/sec = (360°/stroke) x (number of 
strokes/arm/sec for 25 yards), 
which was obtained from a study 
completed by Craig (6). Richardson 
(26) reported that the average num- 
ber of arm strokes per 25 yds of the 
pool was 20. An average time (sec- 
onds for 25 yards) was obtained for 
this specific sample during one of 
their swimming practices. The Cy- 
bex I1 dynamometer was calibrated 
according to the manufacturer's 
specifications before testing began 
(7). The damping was set at two (2). 
and the paper speed was set at 5 mm 
per second (30). 
The axis of the Cybex !I was 
aligned with the axis of the humerus 
in the prone position for externall 
internal rotation with the arm at 90" 
of abduction (1 1) (Figure 2). velcrodU 
straps were used to stabilize the waist 
and chest. The subjects completed 
three submaximal repetitions at the 
specified speed prior to testing. A 
30-second rest occurred between 
warm-up and the initiation of the 
test. The test included three repeti- 
tions of maximum effort at 60°/sec 
and an endurance trial of 50 repeti- 
tions at 240°/sec. One-minute rest 
periods were provided between test- 
ing speeds (27). No verbal encour- 
agement was given. All tests were 
completed bilaterally, and the testing 
order was randomized. 
Data Analysis 
The Pearson product moment 
correlation coefficient and multiple 
regression (R) analysis were com- 
Volume 16 Number 6 kember 1992 JOSPT 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on August 12, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 1992 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.

RESEARCH STUDY 
FIGURE 2. Cybex IP prone test position for 
external/internal rotation. 
puted to determine if a relationship 
existed between the variables. The 
significance level for all variables in- 
vestigated was P < 0.00 1. Three 
paired t-test analyses of the data 
were computed to indicate if there 
was a significant difference (p < 
0.05) between right and left range of 
motion, strength, and endurance 
ratios. 
RESULTS 
In the sample of swimmers stud- 
ied, the average age that the swim- 
mers began competition was 8 (s = 
2). They now participate in eight 
practices/week (s = 2), with an aver- 
age yardage/workout of 7,000 yds (s 
= 2,000 yds). The swimmers practice 
10 months per year (2 1 month). 
Ninety-seven percent stretch prior to 
workout and started stretching at 
age 10 (s = 3). Ninety-one percent of 
the swimmers are on a weight train- 
ing program. Ninety-four percent of 
these individuals train with free 
weights, 94% train with Nautilus, 
and 63% use the swim bench. None 
of the athletes uses any other equip 
ment for strength training. The 
mean age at which the swimmers 
started weight training was 14 (s = 
2). Ninety-four percent of three indi- 
viduals had ever used hand paddles, 
with only 4 1 % presently using hand 
paddles. The percent of swimmers 
who had ever experienced shoulder 
pain was 87%. Sixty-nine percent 
presently experience some degree of 
shoulder pain, and 3 1% have shoul- 
der pain that is presently effecting 
their swimming ability. The mean shoulder flexibility 
and standard deviation measure- 
ments as well as correlation coeffi- 
cients for left and right shoulder 
flexibility to shoulder pain appear in 
Table 3. There was a low and non- 
significant correlation between 
shoulder flexibilitv and competitive 
swimmers with shoulder pain (p > 
0.001). There was no significant dif- 
ference between the right and left 
range of motion measurements (p > 
0.0.5). 
The results of the mean ratios 
for external/internal rotation and 
abduction/adduction for left and 
right shoulder strength as well as 
correlation for strength ratios to 
shoulder pain are summarized in Ta- 
ble 4. Mean endurance ratios for ex- 
ternal rotation, internal rotation, ab- 
duction and adduction, and correla- 
tion coefficients for endurance ratios 
to shoulder pain are summarized in 
Table 5. There was no significant 
difference between the right and left 
shoulder mean percent ratios (P > 
0.05). Very low and nonsignificant 
correlations, shown in Table 4, were found between external/internal ro- 
tation and abduction/adduction 
strength ratios and shoulder pain in 
swinimers. The correlation coeffi- 
cients in Table 5 for endurance ra- 
tios of 50 repetitions for both exter- 
nal rotation and abduction at 240'1 
sec showed a significant correlation 
to shoulder pain (p < 0.00 1). This 
represents a moderately negative 
correlation-as the endurance ratios 
of external rotation and abduction 
decrease, the reported value on the 
pain scale increases. 
The results of the multiple 
regression (R) analysis showed a sig- 
nificant multiple regression coeffi- 
cient of 0.73 for the left and 0.78 
for the right for the combined vari- 
ables of external rotation and abduc- 
tion endurance ratios to shoulder 
pain in swimmers (p < 0.001). The 
R' was 0.54 left and 0.60 right, 
which indicates that more than 54% 
and 60% of the variation in pain rat- 
ing could be explained by the combi- 
nation of external rotation and ab- 
duction ratios at 240°/sec in the left 
and right sides, respectively. 
TABLE 3. Left and right shoulder flexibility in supine and correlation coefficients lor shoulder flexibility to 
shoulder pain. 
TABLE 4. Left and right shoulder strength ratios of external/internal rotation and abduction/adduction and the 
correlation coefficients for strength ratios to shoulder pain. 
JOSPT Volume 16 Number 6 December 1992 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on August 12, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 1992 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.

RESEARCH STUDY 
Mean Standard Correlation (r) Previous literature indicates that 
Endurance Ratio Peak Torque Deviation to Shoulder Pain internal rotation strength is greater 
for 50 Repetitions than external rotation strength by 
at 240'/sec Lefi Right Lefi Right 
(%I (Oh) (%I (%I Right approximately a 3:2 ratio (3, 4, 29, 
16). A 3:2 ratio (67%) and the actual 
External rotation 80 78 23 22 -.61* -.69' 
106 107 17 17 value obtained from the data in this Internal rotation -.24 -.46 
Abduction 55 60 36 37 -.55' -.63' study (7 1 % left and 70% right) are 
Adduction 124 127 25 36 -.01 .07 quite similar. In Table 5, the stand- 
I ! _ 1 r--~ ---&--- ' Significant at p < 0.001 
TABLE 5. left and right shoulder endurance ratios of external mtation, internal mtation, abduction and 
adduction and correlation coeHicients for endurance ratios to shoulder pain. The endurance ratio was defined 
as the mean of the peak toque for the last three repetitions divided by the mean of the peak toque for the 
first three repetitions multiplied by 100. 
DISCUSSION 
The descriptive findings concur 
with the study by Richardson et al 
(26). which reported that the major- 
ity of successful swimmers have 
fewer than 1-2 months of unsched- 
uled practices per year in a swim- 
ming career that lasts 10-1 5 years. 
The incidence of shoulder pain, the 
number and amount of workouts, 
and yardage these subjects com- 
pleted were representative of the 
characteristics of the competitive 
swimmer previously described in the 
literature (2, 20, 22-24, 26). 
The mean range of motion in 
Table 3 demonstrated that the swim- 
mers in this study were hypomobile 
in internal rotation compared with 
published standards, which report 
that normal internal rotation range 
of motion is 90" (1 0). Pappas (25) 
hypothesized that limited internal 
rotation was the result of reactive fi- 
brosis of the capsular tissues because 
of repetitive microtrauma in individ- 
uals with shoulder impingement. 
The mean range of motion for 
shoulder external rotation and ab- 
duction demonstrated hypermobility 
in these directions when compared 
with normative data (external rota- 
tion = go0, abduction = 180"). 
Individuals competing in over- 
head sports have often been re- 
ported to demonstrate at least a 15" 
increase in shoulder external rota- 
tion and abduction range of motion (1 5) compared with published stand- 
ards (I 0). 
Although most of the literature 
on rehabilitation of swimmers em- 
phasizes passive stretching into ex- 
ternal rotation for the shortened in- 
ternal rotators, the results of this 
study show that external rotation 
range of motion is 10- 1 1 " greater 
than normal (2, 8, 14, 18, 21). The 
average mean internal rotation was 
quite limited-45" right and 49" 
left. The greatest amount of internal 
rotation measured in any of the 
swimmers was 70". None of the 
treatment protocols presently de- 
scribed in the literature addresses 
the issue of shortening of the exter- 
nal rotators (1 I, 14, 18, 20, 26). 
In addition, the idea that shoul- 
der mobility may cause shoulder 
pain may not be important, given 
that the correlation coefficients of 
shoulder flexibility to shoulder pain 
in swimmers were extremely low and 
nonsignificant (Table 3). 
The majority of swimmers in this 
study were hypermobile in shoulder 
abduction, external rotation and 
flexion compared with published 
norms (1 0). but not all swimmers ex- 
perienced shoulder pain. Similarly, 
all of the swimmers were hypomobile 
in shoulder internal rotation, but not 
all swimmers experienced shoulder 
pain. Therefore, there was little cor- 
relation between hypermobility or 
hypomobility and shoulder pain in 
competitive swimmers. ara aeviation was large ror me exter- 
nal rotation endurance ratio due to 
the fact that a few swimmers with a 
pain scale rating above one were un- 
able to maintain enough torque to 
register on the computer, and their 
rating was zero. 
The results of the shoulder ab- 
duction/adduction strength and en- 
durance ratios, represented in Ta- 
bles 4 and 5, are similar to "normal" 
(3,4, 16, 29) values for abduction1 
There was a low and 
nonsignificant 
correlation between 
shoulder flexibiliiy and 
competitive swimmers 
with shoulder pain. 
adduction. In Table 4, adduction 
strength was found to be greater 
than abduction strength by approxi- 
mately a 2: 1 ratio, which corre- 
sponds to previous studies by Con- 
nelly et al (3), Cook et al (4), Weldon 
et al (29), and Ivey and Calhoun 
(1 6). The actual value obtained from 
this study (57% on the left and 56% 
on the right) was very similar to the 
reported "normal" ratio of 50%. 
There was no significant correlation 
between externallinternal rotation 
and abduction/adduction strength 
ratios and shoulder pain in competi- 
tive swimmers (Table 4). 
Adduction endurance ratios 
were greater than loo%, which indi- 
cates that the adductors were getting 
stronger through the testing period 
while the abductors, with a mean of 
Volume 16 Number 6 December 1992 JOSPT 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on August 12, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 1992 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.

RESEARCH STUDY 
60'31, were getting weaker (Table 5). 
The standard deviation is larger for 
the abduction endurance ratio due 
to the fact that a few swimmers with 
a pain scale rating above one were 
unable to maintain enough torque to 
register on the computer, and their 
percent ratios were zero. 
The correlation coefficients for 
the endurance ratios of 50 repeti- 
tions for both external rotation and 
abduction at 240°/sec represented a 
moderately high negative correla- 
tion. The negative correlation indi- 
cated that as the endurance ratios of 
external rotation and abduction de- 
Individuals competing 
in overhead sports 
have offen been 
reported to 
demonstrate at least a 
IS0 increase in 
shoulder external 
rotation and 
abduction range of 
motion. 
creased, the reported value on the 
pain scale increased (Table 5). Falkel 
and Murphy (1 2) reported that 
swimmers with shoulder pain have 
significantly lower absolute external 
rotation endurance than swimmers 
without shoulder pain. Their work is 
similar to this study's findings of a 
moderately high negative correlation 
between endurance ratios of exter- 
nal rotation, abduction, and shoul- 
der pain in swimmers. 
The first and second parts of the 
null hypothesis, which state that 
there is no correlation between 
shoulder flexibility and strength ra- 
tios for external/internal rotation, abduction/adduction, and shoulder 
pain experienced by swimmers, are 
not rejected. The third part of the 
null hypothesis, which states that 
there is no correlation between ex- 
ternal rotation, abduction endur- 
ance, and shoulder pain in competi- 
tive swimmers is rejected as a result 
of significant correlation (p I 0.00 1) 
to shoulder pain. 
The limitations of this study in- 
clude a relatively small sample size, 
no distinction between the influence 
of various pathologies, such as im- 
pingement, subluxation, labrum 
tears, or multidirectional instabili- 
ties, and limited familiarity of the 
subjects with testing procedures. 
This study illustrates the need for 
further research. Possible future 
studies include correlating the ef- 
fects of different pathologies (ie., im- 
pingement, subluxation, and labrum 
tears) on endurance ratios and shoul- 
der pain in swimmers. A second 
study incorporating an intervention 
program of endurance training for 
the external rotators and abductors 
could determine if improved endur- 
ance ratios decrease the incidence of 
shoulder pain in swimmers. 
CONCLUSION 
The results of the multiple 
regression analysis of external rota- 
tion and abduction endurance ratios 
showed a significant correlation to 
shoulder pain in competitive swim- 
mers. This suggests that when evalu- 
ating swimmers, the clinician needs 
to be aware of the importance of as- 
sessing the endurance ratios of the 
shoulder abductors and the external 
rotators at 240°/sec, because as the 
endurance ratios decreased, the re- 
ported level of pain and dysfunction 
increased. The flexibility data 
showed an extremely low, nonsignifi- 
cant correlation to shoulder pain. In 
light of the data obtained from this 
study, present treatment protocols 
that encourage stretching into exter- 
nal rotation should be questioned. 
psl'-r ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors greatly appreciate 
the cooperation and support of Ste- 
phen Ford and members of the Uni- 
versity of Pittsburgh swimming 
team, their coaches, and the athletic 
training department in preparation 
of this study. We also thank Dr. John 
Bolvin for his guidance and 
encouragement. 
REFERENCES 
I. Beasley R: Antagonistic and eccentric/ 
concentric strength ratios of the shoul- 
der internal and external rotators in 
women swimmers and nonathletes. 
(abstr) Phys Ther 69(5): 15 1, 1989 
2. Ciullo /V, Stevens C: The prevention 
and treatment of injuries to the shoul- 
der in swimmers. Sports Med 7: 182- 
204, 1989 
3. Connelly Maddux RE, Kibler WB, Uhl 1: lsokinetic peak torque and work 
values for the shoulder. / Orthop 
Sports Phys Ther 1 O(7): 264-269, 1989 
4. Cook EE, Cray VL, Savinar-Nogue E, 
Medeiros 1: Shoulder antagonistic 
strength ratios: A comparison between 
college-level basebali pitchers and 
nonpitchers. I Orthop Sports Phys Ther 
8(9): 451-461, 1987 
5. Counsilman /E: The Science of Swim- 
ming, Englewood Cliffs, N/: Prentice- 
Hall, 1968 
6. Craig AB: Use of stroke rate, distance 
per stroke and velocity relationships 
during training for competitive swim- 
ming. In: Terauds /, Bedingfield E (eds), 
Swimming 111 Baltimore, MD: Univer- 
sity Park Press, 1 978 
7. Cybex: Isolated joint testing and exer- 
cises: A handbook for using Cybex 11 
and the UBXT. Ronkonkoma, NY: Cy- 
bex, Division of Lumex Inc., 1983 
8. Dominguez RH: Shoulder pain in age- 
group swimmers. In: Eriksson B, Fur- 
burg B (eds), Swimming Medicine IV, 
Baltimore, MD: University Park Press, 
1978 
9. Dominguez RH: Shoulder pain in 
swimmers. Phys Sports Med 8(7): 37- 
42, 1980 
10. Duesterhaus Minor MA, Duesterhaus 
Minor S: Patient Evaluation Methods 
for the Health Professional, Reston, 
VA: Reston Publishing Company, 1985 
I I. FalkellE, Murphy TC, Murray TF: Prone 
positioning for testing shoulder inter- 
nal and external rotation on the Cybex 
I1 isokinetic dynamometer. / Orthop 
JOSPT Volume 16 Number 6 December 1992 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on August 12, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 1992 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.

RESEARCH STUDY 
Sports Phys Ther 8(7):368-370, 1987 
12. Falkel /E, Murphy TC: Case principles: 
Swimmer's shoulder. In: Malone TE 
(ed), Shoulder Injuries, Sports Injury 
Management, Vol. I, No. 2, Baltimore, 
MD: Williams & Wilkins, 1988 
13. Cajdosik RL, Bohannon RW: Clinical 
measurements of range of motion: Re- 
view of goniometry emphasizing reli- 
ability and validity. Phys Ther 67(12): 
1867-1872, 1987 
14. Creipp IF: Swimmer's shoulder: Influ- 
ence of flexibility and weight training. 
Phys Sports Med l3(8): 92- 105, 1985 
15. Harner CD: The unstable shoulder 
pathophysiology and diagnosis. Pre- 
sented at the annual Panther Sports 
Medicine Symposium, Pittsburgh, PA, 
December, 1 989 
16. lvey FM, Calhoun /H: lsokinotic testing 
of shoulder strength: Normal values. 
Arch Phys Med Rehabil66: 384-386, 
1985 
17. lobe FW: (Commentary) Patterns of 
flexibility, laxity, and strength in nor- 
mal shoulders and shoulders with in- 
stability and impingement. Am / Sports 
Med 18(4): 375, 1990 18. lohnson I: Musculoskeletal injuries in 
competitive swimmers. Mayo Clin 
Proc 62: 289-304, 1987 
19. Kapandji IA: The Physiology of the 
loints: Upper Limb, New York, NY: 
Churchill Livingstone Inc., 1982 
20. Kennedy IC, Hawkins R, Krissoff WB: 
Orthopaedic manifestations of swim- 
ming. Am I Sports Med 6: 309-322, 
1978 
21. McMaster WC: Anterior glenoid la- 
brum damage: A painful lesion in 
swimmers. Am I Sports Med 14: 383- 
387, 1986 
22. McMaster WC: Painful shoulder in 
swimmers: A diagnostic challenge. 
Phys Sports Med 14(12): 108-122, 
1986 
23. Moynes DR, Perry 1, Antonelli Dl, lobe 
FW: Electromyography and motion 
analysis of the upper extremity in 
sports. Phys Ther 66(12): 1905- 19 1 1, 
1986 
24. Nuber C, lobe FW, Perry IK, Moynes 
DR, Antonelli D: Fine wire EMC analy- 
sis of the shoulder during swimming. 
Am I Sports Med 14: 7- 1 1, 1986 
25. Pappas AM, Zawacki RM, McCarthy CF: Rehabilitation of the pitching 
shoulder. Am I Sports Med 13: 223- 
235, 1985 
26. Richardson AB, lobe FW, Collins HR: 
The shoulder in competitive swim- 
ming. Am / Sports Med 8(3): 159- 163, 
1980 
27. Stratford PW, Bruulsema A, Maxwell B, 
Black T, Harding B: The effect of inter- 
trial rest internal on the assessment of 
isokinetic thigh muscle torque. I Or- 
thop Sports Phys Ther 1 1(8): 362-366, 
1990 
28. Troup I: United States Swimming 
Sports Medicine Shoulder Pain Ques- 
tionnaire. United States Olympic 
Training Center Swimming, 1750 East 
Boulder Street, Colorado Springs, CO 
80909-5770 (personal communica- 
tion) 
29. Weldon C, Snouse SL, Shultz S: Nor- 
mative strength values for knee, shoul- 
der, elbow and ankle for females ages 
9-73 as determined by isokinetic test- 
ing. Athl Train 23(4): 325-33 1, 1988 
30. Winter DA, Wells RP, Orr CW: Errors 
in the use of isokinetic dynamometers. 
Eur / Appl Physiol43: 397-408, 198 1 
Volume 16 Number 6 December 1992 JOSPT 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on August 12, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 1992 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.

