Paraplegia IS ('980) 94-100 0031-1758/80/00830094$02.00 
© 1980 International .:\1edical Society of Paraplegia 
ANALYSIS OF SWIMMING POOL ACCIDENTS RESULTING IN 
SPINAL CORD INJURYl 
By BARTH A. GREEN, M.D.,2 M. ALEXANDER GABRIELSEN, Ph.D.,3 WILEY J. HALL, B.S.4 
and JAMES O'HEIR5 
2 Acute Spinal Cord Injury, South Florida Regional Spinal Cord Injury System; 3 Director, 
Studies in Human Habitability, Nova University, Fort Lauderdale, Florida; 4 D3partment 
of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California; 
5 Emergency Medical Services, University of Miami, Miami, Florida 
Key words: Spinal Cord Injury; Swimming pool; diving; negligence; rescue equipment 
Introduction 
THE National Electronics Injury Surveillance System (NEI SS) reported an 
estimated 65000 pool-related accidents occur in the United States annually. 
With the exception of death, acute spinal cord injury represents the most C2.ta­
strophic result of these accidents with regard to morbidity, and in terma of per­
manent disability and cost. It has been adequately documented that optimal care of 
the spinal cord injury patient occurs with the greatest consistency within a compre­
hensive spinal cord injury system. Unfortunately, these centres are few in number 
and far between in location. In the United States at present, there are 13 federally 
designated Model System programmes. Additionally, 19 Veterans Administration 
Hospitals provide spinal cord injury centre care. Other centres operate without 
official designation. However, at present, there is no nationally organised care 
system providing comprehensive, specialised care to all patients who have suffered 
these devastating injuries. Additionally, across the country there is a great 
disparity regarding the delivery of pre-hospital care. In many areas, pre-hospital 
care has attained a high level of sophistication with stratification of personne l and 
identification and designation of emergency care centres, both general and 
specialised. Efforts are on-going at local, state and federal levels to guarantee the 
availability of spinal cord injury centre care and concurrently upgrade pre-hospital 
care where necessary. 
Method 
This study involved the analysis of 50 retrospective and 22 prospective 
swimming-pool accident cases. The retrospective cases were defined as accidents 
occurring prior to I January 1976 and were studied because extensive records were 
available due to the completion of both the acute and rehabilitative phases of 
treatment for these patients. The prospective cases were examined so that 
Correspondence. Barth A. Green, M.D., Chief, Acute Spinal Cord Injury, University 
of Miami, School of Medicine, Department of Neurological Surgery (D4-6), P.O. Box 
016960, Miami, Florida 33IOI. 
1 This work is supported in part by the Rehabilitative Services Administration 
# 13-P-59258/4-0I. 
94 
PAPE RS READ AT THE ANNUAL SCIENTIFIC MEE TING, 1979 95 
information could be collected within hours of the occurrence and provide a more 
detailed accident scene analysis while the associated circumstances were fresh in 
the minds of victims and witnesses. In the majority of cases, the scene was visited 
by team members, and photographed and analysed in terms of environmental 
factors relating to the event. The victims, witnesses and involved porfessional and 
para-professional personnel were interviewed and all available records were 
reviewed in detail. In many cases, active litigation presented a barrier to release 
of information. Each case report consisted of a narrative summary of the events 
preceding the accident, human factors related to the incident, pool and equipment 
data, medical analysis and observations and recommendations. 
Results 
Sixty-four of the 72 cases reviewed resulted in spinal cord injury, and 57 were 
determined to be quadriplegics (Table I). The distribution of the skeletal and 
TABLE I 
Type of injuries 
A. Tetraplegic 57 
B. Skull fracture and lacerations 2 
C. Permanent brain damage 3 
D. Broken arm and damaged shoulder 1 
E. Mid-dorsal vertebrae compression 
fracture 1 
F. Fracture of vertebrae with no 
permanent damage 4 
G. Fracture of neck with some 
neurological deficiency 2 
H. Permanent internal injuries 1 
I. Minor injury 1 
neurological levels of injury correlate with previously reported data (Table II). 
The majority of the injuries occurred in the mid to low cervical levels, a region 
recognised as exhibiting the greatest mobility of any portion of the spinal column 
and therefore most susceptible to such injuries. The primary cause of injury was 
diving into shallow water with a significant number being associated with water­
slides. Surprisingly, only 5 accidents resulted from unintentional acts, such as 
falls (Table III). In 75 per cent of the cases, Emergency Medical Services 
personnel responded within 10 min of notification. It was distressing to note that 
in 59 cases, the victims were removed from the pool improperly, considering the 
nature of their injury. 
Approximately one-third of the patients arrived at the first medical facility 
within 15 min. In excess of one-third of the patients were treated at more than 
three hospitals during their acute care phase. It was obvious from the medical 
analyses of the treatment records that the length of hospitalisation and the type of 
management differed drastically in most cases. There was little similarity of 
treatment programmes, either surgically or non-surgically, between the various 
physicians, hospitals and centres in managing these acute injuries. Twenty-seven 
96 PARAPL EGIA 
TABLE II 
Level of injuries 
Level Skeletal Neurological 
---------_._--
CI -0- I 
CI-2 2 -0-
C2-3 I -0-
C2-3- 4 I -0-
C3- 4 I -0-
C4 I 3 
C4-S 8 I 
C4-S-6 I I 
Cs IS 16 
CS-6 12 4 
CS-7 I -0-
C6 6 19 
C6- 7 7 I 
C7 I I 
C8-T -0- I 
T 4, S, 6, 7, 8, 9 I -0-
T6 I I 
None 2 6 
61 68 
The number of spinal cord injuries by bony and neurological level. There was no 
correlation between the skeletal level and neurological function in the table. 
of the patients were admitted to a spinal cord injury centre within I day of the 
injury, which must be regarded as a positive factor when considering the small 
number of such facilities available in this country. 
Analysis of the personal characteristics of the victims was consistent with 
demographic data reported previously, i.e., the majority being young, caucasian 
males. By height and weight, they fall into a category which is slightly larger than 
average, perhaps because the majority of these injuries seem to occur in more 
athletically inclined or physically active individuals. There were no special trends 
regarding the day of the week or the particular hour of occurrence, with the 
exception that most of the injuries occurred during the afternoon or evening. The 
peak time of occurrence was different, however, from the National Registry report 
by Ducker, which indicated that most spinal cord injuries occurred between 
midnight and 5 a.m. 
It was interesting to note that 37 of the patients received no formal swimming 
or diving instructions, most claiming to be self-taught or trained by relatives or 
friends. Additionally, 46 of the patients had little or no familiarisation with the 
pool in which they were injured. There have been numerous reports of alcohol 
and/or drugs associated with spinal cord injuries as with other forms of trauma; 
however, in this study few of the victims had consumed alcohol and in only one 
case was there suspicion of drug ingestion. 
Sixty-nine of the 72 victims received no verbal or written warnings of the 
dangers related to pool activities. Fifty-five of the patients were extricated from 
the pool by persons with no training in rescue techniques. Improper extrication 
PAPERS READ AT THE ANNU AL SCIENTIFIC MEETING, 1979 97 
TABLE III 
Activity associated with accident 
A. Diving 
I. Dive into shallow portion (4 feet or less of an 
in-ground pool containing variable depth 18 
2. Dive into an above-ground constant depth vinyl 
linear pool of 4 feet or less from attached 
platform, deck, coping of pool, or ladder 18 
3· Dive into an above-ground vinyl pool with 
variable depth into shallow end from deck or 
attached platform 2 
4· Dive from springboard 30 inches or less from water 3 
5· Dive from I-metre springboard I 
6. Dive from 3-metre springboard 5 
7· Dive from pool's internal steps I 
8. A cannonball dive into shallow portion of pool I 
9· Dive from deck of pool into deep or hopper 
bottom pool 2 
10. Struck springboard while executing dive from 
I -metre board I 
II. Struck end wall of pool while diving from I -metre 
board I 
12. Dive from deck into water 5t feet deep I 
13· Struck up-slope of bottom from dive of3-feet 
high springboard I 
14· Dive from roof of house and balcony of 
apartment house 2 
B. Water Slide 
I. Head first entry into shallow water C3t feet or less) 6 
2. Feet first entry into shallow water I 
3. Dive from top of slide into shallow water I 
C. Others 
I. Fell into pool I 
2. Struck internal steps while swimming underwater I 
3· Slipped on deck of pool and struck coping I 
4· High school physical education swimming class I 
5· Attempting rescue of another swimmer I 
6. Fell from ladder of 3-metre diving stand I 
7· Got stuck in bottom drain of pool I 
is frequently associated with secondary spinal cord injuries and it has been the 
unhappy experience of the authors that victims of diving accidents have reported 
initial motor function after impact but after being pulled over pool edges, rolled 
over or manipulated improperly, have lost this capability. In 54 of the cases, 
there was no person designated as responsible for the pool area present at the time 
of injury. 
The human factor appeared to be a very important consideration in these 
injuries. A subjective analysis of the information related to each accident 
PARAPLEGIA 
indicated that 54 cases involved an element of contributory negligence on the part 
of the victim. In addition, pool design and owner failure to take appropriate 
precautionary measures contributed to many of the accidents. The personal 
characteristics of the injured persons are presented in Table IV. Commonly used 
national figures show an estimated 4: I ratio of male to female. In this study that 
ratio was much higher with 64 of 72 cases involving males. It was also of interest 
TABLE IV 
Personal characteristics of injured persons 
A. Age 
0-6 I 31-36 5 
7-12 6 37-42 5 
13-18 29 43-48 2 
19-2 4 15 49 and above 3 
25-3 0 6 
B. Sex 
Male 64 Female 8 
C. Race 
Caucasian 68 Non-White 4 
D. Weight 
Below 100 lb 4 161-1 75 9 
IOI-II5 3 176-190 17 
II6-130 II 191-205 2 
131-1 45 4 206 and above 4 
146-160 18 
E. Height 
Below 5' 6 5'9"-6'0" 23 
5'1"-5' 4" 5 6'1" and above 12 
5'5"-5 '8" 26 
that 61 per cent of the victims were in the 13-24 age group, which coincides with 
the range generally reported as at highest risk for spinal cord injury. 
Forty incidents occurred in residential pools, 10 in hotels/motels, 40 in 
apartment complexes, I in a commercial pool, 6 in public pools i.e., school or park, 
and 2 in private clubs. One-third of the pools were of the above-ground type and 
approximately one-half had vinyl liners which were reported by the victims as 
slippery and related to the cause of the injury. Fifty-one of the accidents occurred 
in less than 4 feet of water, perhaps because 46 of the pools did not have depth 
markings and only 13 had visual markings on the bottom of the pool. In addition, 
22 of the injuries occurred when lighting was a factor due to the time of accident. 
In 15 of these cases the lighting was considered inadequate. Finally, there were no 
safety rules posted in 43 of the pools. 
Following the accidents rescue efforts were hampered by additional lack of 
regard for safety measures. The majority of the pools did not have rescue equip­
ment within a reasonable distance at the time of the injury, and only 28 had rescue 
equipment in a fixed position. Furthermore, only 20 of the sites had a telephone 
PAPERS READ AT THE ANNUAL SCIENTIFIC MEETING , 1979 99 
available in the pool area. Table V reflects those factors considered by the 
engineering group as contributing to many of the injuries. 
TABLE V 
Pool factors contributing to accident 
A. Shallow water (5 feet or less) 52 
B. Improper installation of equipment 8 
C. Slippery condition of pool's bottom 21 
D. Absence of bottom markings 43 
E. Absence of depth markings 35 
F. No warning signs 45 
G. Inadequate depth of water for springboard diving 9 
H. Inadequate lighting for night swimming 9 
1. Water level had been lowered 10 to 12 inches I 
J. No fence around pool I 
K. Inadequate water depth under water slide 7 
L. Slippery deck condition I 
M. Slippery condition of surface of springboard 1 
N. Improper design creating unsuspecting drop-o ? I 
O. Slippery coping I 
P. Slippery steps on diving stand (3 metres) 1 
Q. Unsecured bottom drain cover I 
R. Signs not readable to foreigner I 
S. Not applicable I 
Note. In many situations there is more than one factor which may have been related 
to the accident. 
Discussion 
The review of these 72 cases revealed several interesting facts. There were 
appreciable differences between the data available from the retrospective and 
prospective cases. Surprisingly, the prospective patients were more difficult to 
interview and collect data from because of their medical condition and hesitancy 
on the part of the family and legal advisors to allow investigation (even when 
confidentiality was assured). The typical patient profile in the group was that of 
a caucasian male, athletically inclined without pre-existing medical problems, in 
the age group 13 to 24 who sustained cervical fractures as a result of striking the 
bottom of the pool with their heads. A conclusion one may draw from this study 
is that some of these patients may have suffered secondary spinal cord injury due to 
mishandling at the accident scene or during the acute phase of their care. These 
factors may be related to insufficient national public education effort regarding 
identification and pre-hospital management of this type of accident as well as 
public education programmes aimed at prevention of such injuries. Also of note 
were the delays of weeks or months before many of the victims were referred to 
Spinal Cord Injury Centres. This is in spite of the many studies demonstrating 
the effectiveness of such centres in reducing morbidity, mortality and cost of care. 
In the 3 to 4 years since the injuries reviewed have occurred, there has been a 
significant national trend towards utilisation and expansion of spinal cord injury 
system care. Such systems include programmes for prevention, pre-hospital 
emergency medical services, acute in-hospital care, rehabilitation, and life-long 
100 PARAPLEGIA 
follow-up. This trend has been spearheaded by the Regional Spinal Cord Injury 
Care Systems and Veterans Administration Spinal Cord Injury Centre Programmes. 
SUMMARY 
This paper is a summary of a study of 72 cases of swimming-pool accidents 
resulting in serious injuries with the potential of permanent disability. Sixty-four 
of the 72 cases resulted in spinal cord injuries, 57 of which involved quadriplegic 
lesions. The authors observed that the majority of these injuries resulted from a 
lack of good judgement and common sense rather than from intoxication or pool 
structural deficiencies. Also of note was the lack of appropriate first-aid and 
extrication rendered, as well as the absence of uniform treatment and care received 
by the majority of the patients. 
RESUME 
11 s'agit d'une etude portant sur 72 accidents de pis cine avec sequelles graves, dont 66 
dues it des lesions de la moelle epiniere, 57 d'entre elles dans la region cervicale. La 
majorite des lesions cervi cales se sont produites dans la partie moyenne et basse de la moelle 
cervicale. La cause principale des accidents eta it la plongee en eau peu profonde, quelques 
unes associees avec des toboggans. Seulement 5 accidents etaient dus it des chutes non 
intentionnelles. Dans 75% des cas, les secours d'urgence avaient ete donnes dans les IO 
premieres minutes. 59 blesses ont ete retires de la piscine d'une maniere incorrecte. 27 
blesses ont ete admis dans un service specialises dans les premieres 24 heures apres l'accident, 
ce qui doit etre considere comme un facteur positif si l'on considere les Etats-Unis. La 
plupart des accidents se sont produits au cours de l'apres-midi et de la soiree, sans aucune 
incidence particuliere du jour. 37 des blesses n'avaient jamais re<;:u de le<;:on de natation ni 
instructions de plongee, 46 n'etaient pas familiers avec la piscine dans laquelle l'accident a 
eu lieu. La consommation d'alcool n'etait pas elevee, seulement dans un cas les auteurs ont 
pu suspecter l'injestion de drogue. Dans 69 cas sur 72, il n'y avait pas d'avertissement en ce 
qui concerne les dangers, 55 patients ont ete retires de l'eau par des personnes ne connaissant 
pas les techniques de sauvetage. Des aggravations ont ete notees au moment OU les personnes 
ont ete retirees de la piscine. 51 des accidents se son produits it moins de 1m20 de profondeur. 
Les auteurs sont tres decourages par Ie delai en semaines ou mois avant que les victimes ne 
soient transferes dans un etablissement specialise. 
ZUSAMMENFASSUNG 
Diese Arbeit ist eine Zusammenfassung einer Studie von 72 Schwimmbadunfallen, 
die in ernstlichen Verletzungen mit der Moglichkeit fur eine dauernde Arbeitsunfahigkeit 
resultierten. Vierundsechzig von den 72 Fallen resultierten in Ruckenmarksverletzungen, 
von denen 57 Querschnittsverletzungen im Halsbereich waren. Die Authoren waren 
besturzt uber die Feststellung, dass die Mehrheit dieser Verletzugen eher dem Fehlen von 
gutem Urteilsvermogen und gesundem Menschenverstand zuzuschreiben waren, als 
Alcohol Intoxication oder mangelhaften Schwimmbadinstruktion. Wir waren ebenso 
alarmiert uber uber das Fehlen von entsprechender Erster Hilfe und den Methoden der 
unmittelbaren Rettung aus dem Wasser, sowie auch dem Fehlen von einer gleichmassigen 
Sorgfalt in der Behandlung, die die Mehrheit dieser Patienten erhalten hatte. 
Acknowledgement. The study was conducted for the United States Consumer Products 
Safety Commission, Washington, D.C. 
