2019 16th International Conference on Electrical Engineering, Computing Science and Automatic Control (CCE) 
Mexico City, Mexico.  September 11-13, 2019 
978-1-7281-4840-3/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE Design and implementation of motion analysis system 
in swimming 
 
Diana Laura Infante Ramírez  
Biomedical Eng Dep 
Guadalajaras University 
Guadalajara, Mexico 
diana.infante@alumnos.udg.mx  
Marlene Alejandra Domínguez Sucres 
Biomedical Eng Dep 
Guadalajaras University 
Guadalajara, Mexico ale-dgz@hotmail.com 
 
Sarahí Soledad Franco Pérez 
Biomedical Eng Dep 
Guadalajaras University 
Guadalajara, Mexico 
sarai_francop@hotmail.com 
Ilse Valeria Gómez Zavala 
Biomedical Eng Dep Guadalajaras University 
Guadalajara, Mexico 
ilse-gz@hotmail.com  
Norma Ramírez Hernández 
Computer Science Department 
Guadalajaras University 
Guadalajara, Mexico 
Norma.rhernandez@academicos.udg.mx
 
 
Abstract — Among the most common injuries during 
swimming are shoulder and back injuries due to poor technique. 
This is a consequence of the amount of force applied to the shoulder joint in order to be capable of dragging the whole arm outside the water and an exaggerated undulation motion of the 
body when submerging of bringing oneself up to start another arm 
stroke. The purpose of this prototype is to register, analyze and visualize X and Y angles with reference to the gravitational pull in the following body segments: forearm, arm, breast and lower 
back. With this it is possible to generate a reference with which 
injuries can be prevented during swimming. This prototype a motion analysis protocol by means of sensors that record in real time and suggest changes to avoid injuries, portable, compact and 
low-cost design with acceptable results.  
Keywords— swimming, swimming techniques, sports injuries, 
bio signals processing 
I. INTRODUCTION  
Swimming is within the three disciplines that make up the 
triathlon, and is the least impact. However, due to its constant 
repetitive movements it can be much more harmful than we initially believe. Like other sports, swimming has a series of common injuries among those who practice it. Although they are usually milder injuries than those of other disciplines, if they are not treated properly they can become a real problem. The shoulders and knees are the parts most affected by the most common swimming injuries [1, 2, 3]. In the greater case, the injuries in the shoulder are given by a deficiency in the technique due to the amount of force that is exerted on the articulation to be able to remove the whole arm of the water. With this project it is sought to register, analyze and visualize the angles between the forearm, the arm and the trunk to help avoid injuries. 
Although this sport can help strengthen a large majority of 
muscles, poor technique may result in wear or joint dislocation, damage to joints, etc. The best we can do to prevent this injury 
is a good correction technique. This results in a less amount of stress for our joint, this project will focus mainly Butterfly Swimming Technique because that is the style that causes lesions and joint wear.  
A. Butterfly Swimming Technique 
The butterfly swimming technique is a variation breaststroke 
in which both arms are brought forward together over the water and then back while underwater. It is notable for being the most demanding in the amount of force required and the complexity of the technique stroke. This style requires the body to perform upward and downward wave movements while keeping it in a 
horizontal position. In water, the swimmer adopts two extreme 
positions: the hip and upper legs and trunk and submerged heads; Submerged hip and legs and head and upper trunk [4, 5, 6]. (Figure 1.a and 1.f). 
  The technique is mainly divided into two phases, aquatic 
and air phases. 
 
Fig. 1.  Phases of Butterfly Swimming Technique. 1.a) First extreme position. 
Entrance to the water. 1.b) Check the water after stretching arms. 1.c) Pull 
out. 1.d) Average position between the end of pull and push start. 1.e) Push. 1.f) Second extreme position. 1.g) output drive with lateral arms. 
1.h) water inlet arms). 
• Aquatic phase  
o Input. The hands enter the water and then stretched to 
make a downward and backward. Elbow ends in high 

position. Just before this movement the second kick is 
performed. 
o Pull out. Hands go back. It is an intermediate 
phase between the grip and the push. Hands are very close to each other under the body, reaching draw an "8". 
o Propulsion. It matches the first kick and breath. 
Swimmer palms are back. The kick must be strong, but without pulling the body down. For breathing, the neck is s lightly flexed, allowing the 
chin be touching the water. The chest should not come out of the water. At the end of the stroke the palm is oriented upwards before being removed to initiate the aerial recovery 
• Air phase. Water enters the head with the neck flexed water 
passage opening with the front. The arms are stretched 
pulling water laterally palms open outward. At the end the second kick is given, which is the strongest and helps to close the impulse forward of the body 
 
B. Common injuries 
The most common injuries in this technique, are listed below 
[6, 3, 7, 8] 
• Swimmer's shoulder. It occurs mainly when exerting a force 
at the start of the stroke by different factors from reduced internal rotation force or simply bad technique. 
• Knee. When the breaststroke is  swollen, the legs extend 
rapidly and rotate outward, subjecting the inner part of the knee to a great deal of stress. 
• Low back pain. Due to the undulation that has to be done in 
the middle area of the body. The wave motion of the body can generate a stretching of muscles or ligaments or microscopic tears. To avoid it, exercises are performed that strengthen the lumbar area and stretches that prepare it for wave motion 
This is a proposal for the de velopment and implementation 
of a biomedical device with a friendly interface and support for the improvement of swimming technique and thus avoid possible injury. 
C. Hardware 
• Accelerometer. An accelerometer measures acceleration in 
G forces ms2 or (g). Its operation is based on electromechanical principles detecting acceleration forces static or dynamic. These forces include gravity in static matter and vibrations and dynamic movement in question. The acceleration is determined through the change of capacitance of internal capacitive plates due to the movement and the force of gravity acting through said plates. It is then that the orientation of the sensor can be deduced according to the capacitance of the plates. 
• Gyroscope. It is a device that measures the rotation in the 
middle of the angular velocity. Its operation is based on the rotation of a wheel, which measures the revolutions per second (rps) or degrees per second (s). With this unit the angular velocity of a single axis is determined. If it aligns 
with other axes of rotation you can obtain a 3-axis gyroscope.  
The sensor chosen was the MPU 6050 GY-521 3 Axis Gyro 
Accelerometer Sensor Module Arduino, see Fig.2. The MPU-6050 sensor module contains an accelerometer and a gyro in a single chip. It is very accurate, as it contains 16-bits analog to digital conversion hardware for each channel. Therefore it captures the x, y, and z channel at the same time. The sensor uses the I2C-bus to interface with the Arduino Nano.  
 
Fig. 2.  Schematic conection 
Given the values of linear acceleration and angular velocity 
in the X, Y and Z can calculate effectively angles X and Y with respect to the force of gravity is applied. 
ܽ௫௣ൌ݊ܽݐ ିଵሺି௔ೣ
஺ோ/ඥሺܽ௬/ܴܣሻଶ൅ሺܽ௭/ܴܣሻଶሻൈଵ଼଴
గ       eq.1 
ܽ௬௣ൌ݊ܽݐ ିଵሺ௔೤
஺ோ/ඥሺܽ௫/ܴܣሻଶ൅ሺܽ௭/ܴܣሻଶሻൈଵ଼଴
గ       eq.2  
Linear acceleration of X and Y axis based on acceleration 
obtained respectively. Where: 
ܽ௫௣, is the acceleration calculated on the X axis, 
ܽ௬௣, is the acceleration calculated on the Y axis, 
ܴܣ = 16384.0 is the constant relationship between the data 
yielded linear acceleration and the actual value, 
ܽ௫, is the value of acceleration on the x axis, 
ܽ௬ , is the acceleration value on the Y axis and 
ܽ௭ , is acceleration value Z axis. 
݃௫௣ൌ௚ೣ
ீோ      eq.3  
݃௬௣ൌ௚೤
ீோ      eq.4  
With eq. 3 and 4, real values of angular velocity are obtained. 
Where: 
݃௫௣, angular velocity on the X axis, 
݃௬௣, angular velocity on the Y axis, 
ܴܩ = 131.0, constant of relation between the data of angular 
speed and the real value. 
A complementary filter is applied to have a more accurate 
reading, and avoid small cumulative errors over time and prevent the signal from being altered. 
࢞̂ൌ0 . 9 8ሺ࢞̂࢕࢏࢜ࢋ࢘࢖൅ࢍ࢖࢞൅࢚ሻ൅ሺ૙.૙૛ൈࢇ࢖࢞ሻ      eq.5 

ŷ ൌ 0.98ሺ ŷ࢕࢏࢜ࢋ࢘࢖൅ࢍ࢖࢟൅࢚ሻ൅ሺ૙.૙૛ൈࢇ࢖࢟ሻ      eq.6 
Complementary filter is applied where: 
࢞̂ From angle in x with respect to the horizon, 
ŷ From angle in and with respect to the horizon, 
࢞̂࢕࢏࢜ࢋ࢘࢖  Previous calculated value of x with respect to the 
horizon, 
ŷ࢕࢏࢜ࢋ࢘࢖  Previous calculated value of y with respect to the 
horizon, and 
t time between the taking of  ࢞̂࢕࢏࢜ࢋ࢘࢖  and ࢞̂. 
II. METHODOLOGY  
This paper presents the desi gn and implementation of the 
methodology of evaluation and correction butterfly swimming technique, see Fig. 3.  
Data recording was carried out first outside the pool and then 
inside it with normal swimmers practice routines, the device designed was "electrically isolated" for operation inside the pool. Each subject was registered  for five consecutive days, all 
in the same conditions. The angl es between the sections of each 
of the stereotactic points shown in Fig. 4 were recorded. 
The implementation of a graphic interface, has as main 
objective to support the coach (or caregiver) in therapy and 
rehabilitation in real time, providing feedback to the patient (and / or user), with this they prevent injury by early detection of non-natural or forced movements. 
 
 
Fig. 3.  Flow diagram of signal processing of biosensors. 
 
A. Control subjects 
10 Male subjects in an age range of 20 years ± 5, regular 
practicing swimmers from the Olympic pool of the University of Guadalajara, based at the University Center of Exact Sciences and Engineering [9] B. Biosignal registration 
The aim is to develop a graphic interface that processes the 
angles of the main segments of the body during swimming in order to facilitate the detection of hyperextensions and the technique to reduce the risk of injury. Biosensors through strategically placed (see Fig. 4 an d Table 1), the registration is 
made for further processing. 
Biosignal processing is selective to each sensor during 
swimming practice in order to facilitate detection of hyperextension and thereby reduce the risk of injury by an analysis of data, as shown in Fig.5. 
 
 
Sensor Placed 
Breastbone Breastbone is at the center of the 
breastbone 
Arm Above the humerus mid-length of the 
bone and on the side of the corresponding side  
Forearm halfway between the wrist and elbow 
flexion over the radius of each arm 
Back In the lower back, ideally between 
the lumbar 4 and 5 
Thigh On the femur halfway between the 
hip joint and the kn ee in the anterior 
part. 
foot instep On the tibia, midway between knee 
and ankle anteriorly. 
Fig. 4.  Stereotactic position registration of biosignals. 
 
 
Fig. 5.  Risk analysis according to the technique used. 
Start 
Communication and 
Serial - Bluetooth 
Communication and 
Serial - Bluetooth 
Accelerometer 
& Gyroscope 
Processing signals 
All sensor 
User Interface and 
reports 
C. Algorithm implementation  
To register data (Arduino and user interface), we use MatLab 
language. The advantage of MATLAB is, we can see the results of I/O operations quickly (without compiling). 
 
III. R
ESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS  
Technical skill is one of the main determinants of success 
among competitive swimmers. Unfortunately, the biomechanical differences that make one swimmer more profitable than another (or have injuries) are not easy to identify. 
A submersible, light, hydrodynamic and inexpensive 
equipment which allowed to measure the angles of the main body segments during swimming in order to facilitate detection 
and hyperextension and the technique for reducing the risk of injury was developed. See Figure 6. 
In Figure 6, we can observe and start the stroke, but around 
the sample 30 (point a) is stopped and the stroke is resumed from the sample 70, stabilize the image from the sample 120 (point b). It can be seen as the angles of the left arm span a wider range of movement of the right arm. From these data it can be concluded that a non-uniform movement is being generated 
between the arms, although the phases of the stroke coincide. 
 
 
Fig. 6.  Left arm (red), Right arm (blue). Point a) Pause during motion capture. 
Point a) Stability of stroke with anomalies. 
The main lesions are observed in a group of male and female 
swimmers between 15 and 25 years old. It is found that the most common injuries due to poor technique, or effort. The position of the main segments of the body is monitored in real time such 
Sternum, Lumbar column, Humerus (left and right), Ulna (left and right). 
They are located in the poin ts previously listed that 
communicate the information through Bluetooth, they are sent to the user interface to be processed in real time and plot them. 
The user interface are configurable, the user can modify the 
alerts to give a personalized practice and keep the record per patient, to validate the progress in the training sessions and these are evaluated objectively and not subjectively. 
  
 
R
EFERENCES  
. 
 
[1] M. L. e. a. Sein, "Shoulder pain in elite swimmers: 
primarily due to swim-volume-induced supraspinatus tendinopathy.," 
British journal of sports medicine, 2010, 
vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 105-113, 2010.  
[2] A. e. a. Tate, "Risk factors associated with shoulder pain 
and disability across the lifespan of competitive 
swimmers," Journal of athletic training, vol. 47, no. 2, 
pp. 149-158, 2012.  
[3] T. R. Johnston, "Shoulder injuries and conditions in 
swimmers," Endurance Sports Medicine, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 
127-138, 2016.  
[4] E. Nicol, "The biomechanics of freestyle and butterfly 
turn technique in elite swimmers," Sports biomechanics, 
vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1-14, 2019.  
[5] K. Miriam, "Butterfly swimming technique variations 
during an exhaustive swim exercise," in 11th 
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE O N 
KINANTHROPOLOGY , 2017.  
[6] A. AVERIANOVA, "Rotational kinematics of pelvis and 
upper trunk at butterfly stroke: Can fins affect the dynamics of the system?," Journal of biomechanics, vol. 
49, no. 3, pp. 423-428, 2016.  
[7] A. V. Vasiliadis, "Swimmers Are At Risk For Stress 
Fractures? A Systematic Review," 
International Journal 
of Kinesiology and Sports Science, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 25-
31, 2018.  
[8] J. Bailón-Cerezo, "Shoulder Pain Prevalence in 
Competitive Swimmers: A Pilot Study," Revista 
Internacional de Medicina y Ciencias de la Actividad 
Física y del Deporte, vol. 1, no. 1, p. 62, 2016.  
[9] U. d. Guadalajara, "Swimming pool," [Online]. 
Available: http://udg.mx/es/servicios/universitarios/alberca-ol-mpica. 
[10] Arduino. [Online]. Available: https://www.arduino.cc/. 
[Accessed 1 5 2019]. 
 
 
 
 
 

