463Spine injuries in gymnasts and swimmers
An epidemiologic investigation
JACK D. GOLDSTEIN,* MD, PAUL E. BERGER,*&dagger; MD, GARY E. WINDLER,* MD, AND
DOUGLAS W. JACKSON,*&Dagger;, MD
From the *Southern California Center for Sports Medicine, and the &dagger;Memorial Magnetic
Resonance Center, Long Beach, California
ABSTRACT
Three groups of top level female gymnasts of preelite,
elite, national and Olympic caliber were studied without
regard to back pain or injury. These athletes were
compared to a similar group of national caliber female
swimmers. Magnetic resonance imaging scans of each
participant were used to document disk or bony abnor-
malities. The relationship between magnetic resonance
imaging findings and age, height, weight, previous in-
juries, back symptoms, and hours of training per week
each year was examined.
Nine percent of preelite (1/11), 43% of elite (6/14),
and 63% of Olympic level (5/8) gymnasts had spine
abnormalities; 15.8% of all swimmers had spine abnor-
malities. Average hours of training per week and age
were found to be associated with abnormalities seen
on magnetic resonance imaging. Increased intensity
and length of training correlated with previous data that
suggests the female gymnast is prone to spine injuries.
In one large review of female gymnasts, 12.2% of injuries
incurred were to the spine.6 The incidence of spondylolysis
has also been reported to be much higher in gymnasts than
in the general population.’-&dquo; Axial loading and shear force
experienced by the disks, the annulus fibrosus, and the
posterior elements is felt to be very high in these athletes
and contributes to these injuries.’ In addition, loading is
repetitive with extensive daily training, increasing suscep-
tibility to pars interarticularis fatigue fracture/,8, 15, 17,18 end
plate changes,6 and disk degeneration.&dquo; Although age-re-
lated changes can account for degenerative spine abnormal-
ities,11 it is not known how the extra demands incurred bythe gymnast impact upon or accelerate degenerative
changes. This study examined factors that could be causal
in the increased incidence of spine problems in these ath-
letes. Age and hours per week of training correlated with
lumbar spine changes seen on magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI).
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Female gymnasts of preelite, elite, national, and Olympic
levels were compared to swimmers of similar age and level
of competition. No attempt was made to preselect partici-
pants based on a history of back pain or prior injury; all
were from local gymnastic and swim clubs. No gymnast or
swimmer who presented initially with back symptoms was
included in the study.
Demographic data was collected from all participants.
This included: age, weight, height, years of training, hours
of training per week each year, history of scoliosis, previous
spine injury, time off related to back complaints, physician
involvement for prior back injury, and current back symp-
toms.
Magnetic resonance studies were performed with 1.5 Tesla
and 0.5 Tesla Siemens Magnatom scanners (Siemens, Iselin,
NJ). Patients were studied in the sagittal plane using a
repetition time of 2.0 seconds and an echo time of 28 and 70
milliseconds from the level of T-12 to S-1. The same imaging
parameters were used in the transverse axial plane from L-
3 to S-1. Two patients also had imaging of the thoracic spine
using the same parameters. High resolution surface coils
were used and all examinations were judged to be of good to
excellent quality. Images were interpreted by a radiologist
specializing in MRI, with special interest in the spine, who
had no knowledge of the patient history.
Statistics
Results were tabulated on an IBM personal computer (IBM,
Armonk, NY) using the BMDP statistical software (1988;$ Address correspondence and repnnt requests to Douglas W Jackson,
MD, Southern California Center for Sports Medicine, 2760 Atlantic Avenue,
Long Beach, CA 90806

464
BMDP Statistical Software Inc., Los Angeles, CA). Statis-
tical analysis was performed using univariate analysis to
isolate pertinent variables with regard to positive or negative
MRI results. Positive MRI changes were defined as degen-
erative or other disk changes and spondylolysis or spondy-
lolisthesis (Figs. 1 through 7). Univariate statistics included
Student’s t-test and Fischer’s exact test. Stepwise discrimi-
nate analysis was then performed to determine which set of
variables could best predict positive and negative MRI re-
sults in the combined study population. All tests were
against a two-sided alternative hypothesis, and a P value of
0.05 or less was considered significant.
Figure 1. A 19-year-old elite gymnast with symptomatic de-
generative L4-5 disk with central herniation. A, sagittal lumbar
MRI showing L4-5 disk degeneration and herniation. B, trans-
verse MRI of L4-5 disk showing central herniation.Figure 2. An 18-year-old elite gymnast with symptomatic L-5
unilateral pars interarticularis fracture. A, lateral plain roent-
genogram of the lumbosacral spine. B, transverse MRI of
L-5 showing old right L-5 pars interarticularis fracture.
RESULTS
Eleven preelite, 14 elite, and 8 national/Olympic level gym-
nasts were included in the study. There were also 8 swim-
mers at the AA or AAA level and 11 national level swimmers.
A tabulation of MRI results and demographics are seen in
Table 1.
Preelite gymnasts had an average age of 11.8 years, a
mean body mass index (BMI) of 16.8, and trained an average
of 18.2 hours per week in their most current year. Elite
gymnasts had an average age of 16.6, a BMI of 19.3, and
trained 23.2 hours per week in their most current year. Older
national/Olympic gymnasts had an average age of 25.7, a

465
Figure 3. An 18-year-old elite gymnast with symptomatic
Grade 2 spondylolisthesis. A, lateral plain roentgenogram of
the lumbosacral spine showing slip and rounded sacrum. B,Figure 4. A 16-year-old elite gymnast with symptomatic mul-
tiple disk degeneration and central and anterior disk hernia-
tions. A, sagittal MRI of thoracolumbar spine. B, close-up of
thoracolumbar junction.
BMI of 20.9, and trained an average of 22.1 hours per week
in their most current year.
The AA and AAA swimmers had an average age of 14.6,
a mean BMI of 19.8, and trained 11.3 hours per week in the
current year. &dquo;Q&dquo; and national ranked swimmers had a mean
age of 18.6, a mean BMI of 21.3, and trained 16.4 hours per
week in their most current year.
Because no single variable was an adequate predictor of
positive or negative MRI result, and because several vari-
ables were clearly interrelated, stepwise discriminate analy-
sis was used to test known significant variables simultane-
ously (Table 2). Variables of sport, competition level, and
sagittal MRI showing same lesion. C, transverse scan show-
ing spondylolysis at L-5.

466
Figure 5. A 15-year-old elite gymnast with a degenerative
L-5 disk with anterior herniation. A, sagittal MRI. B, transverse
MRI showing herniation.
average hours of training per week were found to contribute
to a small amount of variance. These were excluded from
the analysis without a loss of predictive power. Analysis of
the remaining two variables, age and last hours of training
per week, showed a predictive value of 83.3% for MRI-
positive gymnasts and 73.3% for MRI-negative gymnasts.
The overall predictive value using age and last hours per
week of training was 80.4% (Table 3). The average number
of hours of training per week in the last year was also
correlated with MRI results. Eighty percent of athletes with
positive MRI results trained 15 hours or more per week.
Using this training level as a threshold, 57% of athletes
training 15 hours or more per week had a positive spineFigure 6. A 27-year-old elite gymnast with L-5 bilateral pars
interarticularis fracture and L4-5 facet hypertrophy without
foraminal narrowing.
Figure 7. A 27-year-old national level gymnast with L4-5
degeneration.
MRI, while 87% of athletes training less than 15 hours per
week had a negative spine MRI. No statistical statement
could be made regarding the rate of injury of swimmers
relative to gymnasts because gymnasts trained a signifi-
cantly greater number of hours per week than swimmers.
Swimmers therefore did not reach the threshold number of
hours of training per week to allow comparison.
DISCUSSION
Gymnastics is known to produce high loading of the
spiné 9,18 and this has been shown to result in a higher rate
of fatigue fracture of the pars interarticularis than is ex-
pected for the general population. 10 Schmorl and Junghaus13
described age-related changes of the disk and annulus in
hundreds of cadaveric spines of differing ages. Until the
advent of MRI these changes could not be well visualized in
vivo.
MRI has been shown to be highly sensitive and specific

467
TABLE 1
Demographics
° The amount of hours training at peak of career.
TABLE 2
Univariate analysis&dquo; a
° P values of independent variables relative to MRI result.
TABLE 3
Classification matrix&dquo;
&dquo; Prediction based on variables: age and last hours of training per
week.
for disk lesions that required myelography and/or CT scan-
ning to diagnose previously.4,7 11 Additionally, more subtle
changes of the disks that represent early degenerative
changes can be clearly seen. 11,12,20 Damage to the annulus
can also be demonstrated by MRp9, 20, 21 and the neural
elements are more clearly delineated by MRI than by other
techniques. Osseous abnormalities, including posterior ele-
ment fractures, may be visualized on MRI. Although no
comparative study has been performed comparing MRI with
CT in the evaluation of pars interarticularis fractures, it is
likely that CT may be more sensitive, especially with non-
displaced lesions. In cases where the clinical suspicion of
spondylolysis is high and plain roentgenograms are negative,
radionuclide bone scanning using 99mTc single-photon emis-
sion computed tomography is a very sensitive test. 1
Concern over assessing the potential damaging effects to
the spine of competitive gymnasts prompted this MRI study.The clinician caring for young gymnasts is often confronted
with difficulty in making a specific diagnosis. Reviewing the
symptoms of all of the gymnasts with positive MRI results
showed that 73% of these women had ongoing symptoms
referable to the spine. Only 14% of MRI-negative athletes
had symptoms of low back pain. Most of these had only
mild, intermittent, and activity-related symptoms. Symp-
toms were 73% sensitive and 91 % specific in predicting MRI
results. It is clear there is a high correlation between devel-
oping degenerative change and lumbar symptoms. Persistent
symptoms may be helpful in screening gymnasts with path-
ologic changes.
The long-term consequences of these MRI changes are
unclear at this time. Many of the degenerative disk changes
seen are indistinguishable from those encountered normally
with advancing age.~~ 16 How this will translate to future
symptoms is unknown. Examination of the older gymnast
group suggests that intermittent backache could be one
sequela of early degenerative changes.
The physician caring for high level gymnasts with per-
sistent lumbar complaints will find MRI assessment of the
lumbar spine an excellent addition to the existing diagnostic
test. Although expensive, MRI is free of ionizing radiation
and provides information that may aid in establishing the
extent of early changes. When one is dealing with the
preelite and elite athlete, appropriate restrictions are often
assisted by specific diagnostic studies.
The high association between exposure to repetitive axial
loading and the development of chronic degenerative spine
problems raises several issues. The rate of spine injury might
be decreased by requiring more substantially cushioned
landing mats for gymnasts, even during competition. Also,
since this study suggests that spine changes are &dquo;dose-
related,&dquo; a limitation in the number of hours of training per
week might reduce the incidence of spine injury in gymnasts.
This would admittedly be difficult to enforce in the inter-
national gymnastic community. The penalty to the young
female gymnast should be in points from the judge and not
in injury to her spine.
These young women at the preelite, elite, national, and
Olympic level represent only a very small percentage of the
overall participants in this sport. We do not have enough
information to suggest that an MRI of the lumbar spine be
performed on each young female gymnast. The senior author
(DWJ) prefers to have this done on the preelite young

468
gymnasts that he will follow through their career. It is free
of ionizing radiation and can be repeated as necessary in
young female gymnasts to determine healing or in assessing
new injuries. In the vast majority of gymnasts below preelite
level, and with less significant complaints, symptoms are
the main indicator of altered training and treatment regi-
mens.
The senior author (DWJ) prefers the CT scan over the
MRI to evaluate select pars interarticularis and facet inju-
ries. However, because of the radiation exposure with CT
and technetium scanning, they are used very selectively.
Newer techniques and equipment are increasing MRI ca-
pabilities in demonstrating the posterior elements.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Klaus Barth and the swim coaches of
Long Beach State University, California; Wendy Dorches-
ter, statistical assistant Perinatal Research, Memorial Med-
ical Center Long Beach, California; and Don Peters, SCATS
Gymnastics, Huntington Beach, California.
REFERENCES
1 Collier BD, Johnson RP, Carrera GF, et al Painful spondylolysis or spon-
dylolisthesis studied by radiography and single-photon emission computed
tomography Radiology 154 207-211, 1985
2 Cyron BM, Hutton WC The fatigue strength of the lumbar neural arch in
spondylolysis J Bone Joint Surg 60B. 234-238, 1978
3 DeCandido P, Reinig JW, Dwyer AJ, et al Magnetic resonance assessment
of the distribution of lumbar spine disc degenerative changes J Spinal
Disorders 1 9-15, 1988
4 Edelman RR, Shoukimas GM, Stark DD, et al High-resolution surface-coil
imaging of lumbar disk disease AJR 144 1123-1129, 1985
5 Farfan HF, Osteria V, Lamy C: The mechanical etiology of spondylolysis
and spondylolisthesis. Clin Orthop 117 40-55, 1976
6 Garnck JG, Requa RK Epidemiology of women’s gymnastics injuries Am
J Sports Med 8: 261-264, 1980
7 Gibson MJ, Szypryt EP, Buckley JH, et al: Magnetic resonance imaging of
adolescent disc herniation J Bone Joint Surg 69B: 699-703, 1987
8 Jackson DW, Wiltse LL, Cirincoine RJ Spondylolysis in the female gym-
nast Clin Orthop 117: 68-73, 1976
9 Jackson DW, Wiltse LL, Dingeman RD, et al Stress reactions involving
the pars interarticularis in young athletes Am J Sports Med 9 304-312,
1981
10 Libson E, Bloom RA, Dinan G Symptomatic and asymptomatic spondy-
lolysis and spondylolisthesis in young adults Int Orthop 6 259-261, 1982
11 Masaryk TJ, Ross JS, Modic MT, et al. High-resolution MR imaging of
sequestered lumbar intervertebral disks AJR 150. 1155-1162, 1988
12 Ross JS, Perez-Reyes N, Masaryk TJ, et al: Thoracic disk herniation. MR
imaging Radiology 165 511-515, 1987
13 Schmorl G, Junghaus H The Human Spine in Health Disease New York,
Grune & Stratton, 1959
14 Spencer CW, Jackson DW: Back injuries in the athlete Clin Sports Med
2 191-215, 1983
15 Taillard WF Etiology of spondylolisthesis. Clin Orthop 117. 30-39, 1976
16 Weinreb JC, Wolbarsht LB, Cohen JM, et al: Prevalence of lumbosacralintervertebral disk abnormalities on MR images in pregnant and asympto-
matic nonpregnant women Radiology 170 125-128, 1989
17 Wiltse LL, Newman PH, Mcnab I Classification of spondylolisis and spon-
dylolisthesis Clin Orthop 117 23-29, 1976
18 Wiltse LL, Widell EH, Jackson DW Fatigue fracture The basic lesion in
isthemic spondylolisthesis J Bone Joint Surg 57A 17-22, 1975
19 Yu S, Haughton VM, Ho PSP, et al Progressive and regressive changes
in the nuclear pulposus Part II The adult Radiology 169 93-97, 1988
20 Yu S, Haughton VM, Sether LA, et al Anulus fibrosus in bulging interver-
tebral disks Radiology 169 761-763, 1988
21. Yu S, Sether LA, Ho PSP, et al Tears of the anulus fibrous Correlation
between MR and pathologic findings in cadavers AJNR 9 367-370, 1988
DISCUSSION
Lyle J. Micheli, MD, Boston, Massachusetts: The Ameri-
can public is now asking sports medicine not only to treat
their sports injuries, but also to advise them on sports and
exercise selection for themselves and their children. Too
often these questions reveal our profound ignorance of the
host factors and environmental factors that contribute to
injury or affect performance. What is the best sport for my
child? How much do they train? These are questions we
hear now in our offices. I can assure you that if orthopaedic
sports medicine does not provide scientific answers to some
of these questions, other groups will step forward who will
provide answers, perhaps with much less scientific basis.
Scientific study of overtraining is in its infancy. Such
studies as have been done have looked only at performance,
not safety; have involved endurance sports such as distance
running or swimming; and have used metabolic markers, not
anatomic ones. The present study uses the noninvasive,
nonradiation imaging technique, MRI to assess spinal in-
jury, comparing the incidence of degenerative spinal changes
in young gymnasts and swimmers. This data tells us that 15
hours of gymnastics training per week may be the upper
limit for back safety, even in elite level gymnasts. The
amount of safe training per week may be less in the com-
munity gymnast.
The study may not have been able to answer more of the
questions posed because of a relatively small number of
subjects. A large portion of symptomatic back injuries seen
in gymnasts are overuse injuries of the bony posterior ele-
ments of the spine. The sensitivity and specificity of MRI
in detecting these lesions of the pedicles, pars intraarticu-
laris, or facets has not yet been demonstrated. My own
clinical experience suggests that the MRI is not the best
technique for detecting this type of injury.
I congratulate the authors on a well-conceived and impor-
tant study. I look forward to future studies that will provide
safety limits for the young gymnast’s wrists, the young
swimmer’s shoulders, and the young runner’s knees.

