1 
 Entrapment a ccidents caused by drainage systems in swimming 
pools: A statistical study of accident victims and unsafe 
environments found in field research   
 
 
J. P. Avezaat * and A. Göb**  
 
 
* The Blue Cap Foundation , P.O. box 154 , 2370 AD , Roelofarendsveen , The Netherlands  
(E-mail: joost @thebluecap .com ; info@thebluecap.com )  
** Parents4Safety , Sicherheit in Hotelpools e.V. , Wemmstraße 37 , 63619 Bad Orb , Germany  
(E-mail: a.goeb @parents4safety.de )  
 
 
Abstract  
Fatal accidents occur in swimming pools worldwide.  Several of these accidents are  the result of  
the entrapment of  swimmer s on submerged drainage intakes. Entrapment that is caused by the 
suction forces of drainage intakes and the entanglement of hair, clothing, jewelry and limbs to 
parts of the intake. Ac cident registration has made it possible to make a distinction  in various  types 
of entrapment . Entrapment accidents are often reported to occur in swimming pools of hotels and 
aqua parks and in particular  children are the victim s. In the last five years an  increase in reported 
accidents  is seen in Europe , while the number of reports in North America has been declining . 
Field research , in which a hundred pools of hotel s and aqua parks were subjected to an undercover 
inspection, shows that these accidents are  not an unfortunate combination of unforeseen 
circumstances . Instead these are the result of unsafe pool construction , insufficient safety 
inspections  and a lack in responsibility of pool owners.   
 
 
Keywords  
pool accidents ; suction entrapment ; hair entrap ment ; pool safety; field study ; drainage intake  
 
 
POOL ENTRAPMENT  
Annually, dozens of sometimes fatal accidents occur in swimming pools  worldwide . A major cause 
of several of these accidents is that a swimmer is sucked onto the drainage intake of the swimm ing 
pool. In swimming pools water is circulated for quality control and to feed water slides and other 
water attractions. In general two types of drainage systems are used to circulate the water. Draining 
water by free fall in overflow gutters is nowadays becoming a conventional way to remove the most 
polluted top layer of water from the pool. Nevertheless, the removal of water by suction through 
drainage intakes in the swimming pool is still a widely used method as well. It is known for decades  
that suctio n through drainage intakes can cause serious and sometimes fatal injuries to swimmers. 
Swimmers who intentionally or unintentionally block the intakes of drainage systems can be 
exposed to large amount s of negative gauge pressure. The suction force with wh ich they are held 
against the drainage intake can be of such magnitude that the victims are no longer able to free 
themselves, nor with the help of bystanders. As a result drowning or  severe  internal injuries can 
occur. In addition, t here are reports of sw immers getting stuck by entrapment with  long hair , 
clothing, jewelry and limbs  on drainage intakes.  
 
 
ACCIDENT REGISTRATION  
Dozens of severe and fatal accidents have been reported  not only in Europe but also in Asia, Africa, 
North and South America. Worldw ide over 250 accidents have been reported between 1999 and 
2015 involving entrapment caused by drainage systems  in bathing and swimming areas . Only a few 
2 
 agencies keep a  detailed  record of these pool entrapment accidents  caused by drainage systems in 
bathi ng and swimming areas. These agencies are The Blue Cap Foundation in the Netherlands, 
Parents4Safety in Germany and the Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) in the United 
States. Both The Blue Cap Foundation and Parents4Safety were founded by the rela tives of 
deceased pool entrapment victims  and keep a record of all known pool entrapment accidents and 
incidents in the world . The C PSC only keeps a record of accidents that occur within the United 
States  and releases a report annualy  (Gipson, 2012, 2013; Hnatov, 2014 ). 
 
Categorization of entrapment accidents  
Pool entrapment accidents can be categorized into four distinct groups  based on the circumstances 
that have led to  the entrapment  to occur and the injury that was incurred  (US Consumer Product 
Safety Commission , 2005 ; World Health Organization , 2006 ). The first group is the entrapment of 
body and limbs by suction. This type of entrapment is reported to occur when a swimmer gets too 
close to the covering grate of a submerged drainage intake while fully o r partially blocking the grate  
with body and limbs. The swimmer is held against the grate  when a large amount of negative gauge 
pressure build s up behind the blocked grate . Experimental research in a scientific study has 
demonstrated  that w ithin seconds th e victims can be unable to free themselves nor with the help of 
bystanders ( Avezaat, 2013 ). Getting trapped on a submerged drainage intake can lead to drowning  
and the exposure of the body to suction  can cause fatal injuries before drowning occurs.  
 
The se cond gr oup in which accidents are  categorized is the entrapment of hair. This type of 
entrapment occurs  when  the hair of a victim gets stuck  on the grate  covering  a drainage intake. 
Long h air can get stuck on or in a grate  when it is carried by the flow th rough the grate  of a 
drainage intake and gets caught on or entangled behind that grate  due to a vortex spiral in the flow . 
As a result, the head of the victim  is held under water.  Drown ing can occur  and of those who 
survived hair locks  and even  parts of th e scalp  had to be removed to free them from the entrapment.  
 
The third group concerns the entrapment of jewelry, clothes or small limbs like fingers, toes, hands 
and feet in the grate , drain sumps or pipe ends of intakes. These types of entrapment are refe rred to 
as mechanical entrapment a nd can occur when a drainage intake is not covered sufficiently by a 
grate , i.e. when a g rate is damaged, missing or not mounted properly.  
 
The fourth group in which accidents are categorized is evisceration or disembowelm ent. 
Disembowelment can occur when a large negative gauge pressure is exerted on the intestines of the 
victim when sitting on a drainage intake  (Hultman & Morgan, 1994; Juern et al., 2010) . Pool 
entrapment accidents with disembowelment are often categorize d as a separate group because of the 
horrific  and rare type of injury . However, the cause of the accident , an overexposure to a negative 
gauge pressure, makes this type of entrapment very similar  to body  entrapment by suction.  
 
 
STATISTICAL STUDY  
A statist ical study was carried out  by Parents4 Safety in cooperation with The Blue Cap  Foundation  
to determine  the magnitude of the pool entrapment issue . The aim of this statistical  study was to 
gain more knowledge  about the victims  and the type of envir onment in which accidents occur. An 
additional aim of this study was to determine whether changes in legislation and standardization 
have led to a decrease in reported accident s. 
 
Method  
Information about accident victims w as collected from news articles and acciden t reports  on the 
internet  and the annual reports of the CPSC (Gipson, 2012, 2013; Hnatov, 2014 ). A list of all 
3 
 accidents and  the links to related  news articles and reports can be found on the website of the Blue 
Cap Foundation  (The Blue Cap Foundation, 201 5). For some accidents detailed information was 
obtained from relatives of victims. The internet search was conducted using search engines and 
keywords related to swimming pool entrapment in 22 different languages.  Swimming pool 
entrapment accidents were f ound in 36 different countries.  The results were categorized by the type 
of entrapment accident, the type of injury, the age group of victims , the type of pool environment  
and location. In all categories a distinction was made  between the last two 5 year  periods . The 
search for reported entrapment accidents started in 2011 when The Blue Cap Foundation was 
founded and is ongoing for all periods.  
 
Results  
During the search  96 individual  pool entrapment accidents were  identified  in the period from 2004 
to 2009  and 1 10 individual accidents were identified  in the period from 2010 to 2015.  All 
entrapment accidents were categorized by the type of entrapment of which the results are displayed 
in table 1. Only one case of disembowelment was reported in 2011, but this  case was categorized as 
a suction entrapment.   
 
Table 1. This table shows the type of entrapment of all individual accidents reported in the period from 2004 to 2009 
and from 2010 to 2015. The last column shows the sum of the two  periods.  
Type of entrapment  Period    
 2004 - 2009  2010 - 2015   2004 - 2015  
Suction entrapment  65 85  150 
Hair entrapment  11 18  29 
Mechanical entrapment  1 5  6 
Unknown entrapment  19 2  21 
 
From the descriptions of the accidents was determined whether the accident resulted in the death of 
the victim or whether they incurred  any kind of injury.  The results are displayed in table 2.  
 
Table 2. This table shows the type of injury  of all indiv idual accidents reported in the  period from 2004 to 2009 and 
from 2010 to 2015. The last colu mn shows the sum of the two  periods.  
Type of injury  Period    
 2004 - 2009  2010 - 2015   2004 - 2015  
Fatality  37 40  77 
Injured  57 65  122 
No injury  0 2  2 
Unknown  2 3  5 
 
In table 3 the age groups of the victims is displayed.  In particular, a dist inction is made between the 
age groups  of children because the majority of the victims are young .  
 
4 
 Table 3. This table shows the age groups  of the victims of all individual accidents r eported in the  period from 2004 to 
2009 and from 2010 to 2015. The last colu mn shows the sum of the two  periods.  
Age group of victims  Period    
 2004 - 2009  2010 – 2015   2004 - 2015  
2-6 years  12 30  42 
7-11 years  28 37  65 
12-16 years  21 18  39 
17-80 years 11 11  22 
Unknown  24 14  38 
 
In table 4 the type of swimming pool environment in which all accidents occurred is displayed. 
Pools at hotels , campsites and aqua parks are in principle also public pools. However, for some 
accidents it could not be det ermined with certainty that they occurred at these specific 
environments. It is not excluded that some accidents which have occurred in public swimming 
pools might have  taken  place at a hotel , campsite  or aqua park.  
 
Table 4. This t able displays the type of environment at which all individual accidents occurred  in the  period from 2004 
to 2009 and from 2010 to 2015. The last colu mn shows the sum of the two  periods.  
Type of environment  Period    
 2004 - 2009  2010 - 2015   2004 - 2015  
Hotelpool  21 34  55 
Camp site pool 0 3  3 
Aquapark  8 12  20 
Public pool  15 31  46 
Private pool  0 7  7 
Unknown  52 23  75 
 
In table 5 the  location at which accidents occurred is displayed  by continent . No documented 
information was found about entrapment  accidents that occurred on the continent  of Australia  
within the period from 2004 to 2015, though entrapment accidents have taken place in Australia 
before the year 2004.  It is of interest to highlight the number of accidents in certain countries in 
addit ion to table 5. In the United States 37 accidents, causing 5 fatalities, were reported in the 
period 2004 -2009 and 2 6 accidents, causing no fatalities, were reported in the period 2010 -2015.  
Most European accidents in the period 2004 -2009 were evenly distr ibuted, led by Spain (5), 
Bulgaria (4), Italy (3), Turkey (3), Romania (3) and Belgium (3). In the period 2010 -2015 accidents 
occurred in particular in Sp ain (17), France (6), Germany (5 ), Italy (4)  and the Netherlands (4).  
Brazil accounts for most entrapm ent accidents in South America.  It is particularly noteworthy that 7 
of these accidents occurred in January and February of 2014 before the FIFA World Cup took 
place.  
5 
 Table 5. This table displays the location  of all individual acci dents  by continent , that occurred in the period 2004 -2009 
and 2010 -2015.  
Accident location by continent  Period  
 2004 - 2009  2010 - 2015  
North America  41 29 
Europe  32 47 
South America  13 20 
Asia 7 11 
Africa  1 3 
Unknown country  2 0 
 
Discussion  
Sucti on entrapment of body and limbs is by far the most common type of entrapment that is 
described in accident report s as shown in table 1 . More cases of hair and mechanical entrapment 
have been reported in the last 5 years , though these accidents are still ra rer than suction entrapment. 
In addition, i t cannot be excluded  that in some cases a mechanical entrapment of limbs has resulted 
in a suction entrapment .  
 
It is particularly striking that most victims have  died or were  injured  in the accident as table 2 
displays. This indicates  that mild cases of entrapment  are not  reported by the  victims. The true 
incidence of entrapments in pools is unknown , but the number of swimmers that has experienced a 
entrapment may be much higher . 
 
Table 3 clearly shows that the m ajority of the victims are children , especially found in the age group 
of 7-11 years old. Especially c hildren that are young of age learn by using all of their senses to 
experience the physical world  (Blaustein, 2005).  They have a tendency to touch objects  and play 
with drains by stick ing their hands and feet into apertures  and open pipes (World Health 
Organization, 2006) . From the age of 7 , children  are not always  accompanied or supervised by an 
adult  when entering the pools . They  make extensive use of the  available  water attractions and are 
exposed to drainage intakes close to  these attractions. The flow of water into drainage intakes and 
the flow from inlet nozzles can be  seen as a water attraction . There are accidents known in which 
more than one child g ot entrapped  by suction simultaneously  while blocking multiple drainage 
intakes as a game.  Young c hildren are not always aware of invisible  risks , their bodies are more 
vulnerable  and they have limited  force  to resist the suction  of a drainage intake.  
 
Many entrapment accidents  were reported to occur predominantly in swimming pools of hotels and 
aqua parks at  popular holiday destinations . Table 4 confirms  that accidents take place mainly at 
hotels and aqua parks, but also shows  that accidents frequently  take place in other public pools , 
including  municipal swimming pools .  
 
In the last 5 years more entrapment accidents have been reported in particular in Europe  as table 5 
shows . The number of a ccidents  reported in North America has started to decline. The United States 
accounts for most entrapment accidents and a decline may be related  to changes in pool and spa 
legislation  that have been implemented in the United States in recent years.  In D ecember of 2007  
the Virginia Graeme Baker Pool and Spa Safety Act  was signed into law  . The act was named after 
the granddaughter of former Secretary of State James Baker . Virginia  Graeme Baker died in a tragic 
6 
 entrapment accident  in 2002 after the suction of a drainage intake entrapped her under the water.  
This new law aims specifically  at reducing pool drain deaths  and injuries  by making pools and spas 
safer . Not only  a decline in accidents  is reported, there have also been no fatalities reported in the 
United States since 2009 (Gipson, 2012, 2013; Hnatov, 2014 ). In the last 10 years there have been  
no reports  of accidents in  Australia  either . Stricter legislation and standards in both the United 
States and Australi a prove to be more effective than legislation and standards  in Europe and South 
America.  In the United State s all parts of drainage intakes and their grating have to meet the 
ASME/ANSI A112.19.8 -2007 standard  with documented testing procedures to rule out entrapment 
and at minimum one additional layer of protection is required by law . 
  
 
FIELD STUDY  
In the last 3 years Parent4 Safety has been conducting extensive field research  in swimming pools at 
popular holiday destinations. This research aimed at finding an explanation why so many 
entrapment accidents occur primarily at pools of hotels and aqua parks . The goal was to determine 
whether these accidents are an unfortunate combination of unforeseen circumstances or whether  
these  are the result of  unsafe pool construction and insufficient  safety inspections.  
 
Method  
During a period of 3 years, swimming pools  at hote ls and aqua parks were  subjected to an 
undercover investigation . The owners of the hotels and the st aff of the pools were not aware of an 
investigation taking place, but were occasionally  confronted with the findings afterwards. These 
hotels and aqua parks  were located at  popular holiday destinations in Spain (Canary and Balearic 
Islands), Turkey and Egypt. For each pool a  visual assessment was made of the  general condition of 
the swimming pool and the pool’s environment . Each assessment  included a visual i nspection of the 
way into the pool (stairways  and lifts for the disabled ), inlet nozzles, cleaning intakes, pool lighting, 
the separation and identification of swimming and non -swimming areas, the tiles and foil in the 
pool’s wall and  floor and the drainag e intakes. P hotographic evidence was taken of serious 
technical def ects and construction flaws,  which  may endanger  the safety of the swimmers .  
 
Each inspection included a hair test and a measurement of the water velocity  on each drainage 
intake. The water  velocity was measured with an anemometer and turbine probe designed 
specifically  for the measurement of the flow of liquids , e.g.  water.  Flow measurements were 
conducted across the entire surface of the grate  of each drainage intake, wherein the probe was  
placed directly on one or more apertures  of the grate . Hair tests were conducted  in accordance with 
the European Standard EN 13451 -3, using a hair sample of 50 gram, medium fine, straight, light 
colored, 400 -millimetre -long hair .  
 
Results  
In each pool va rious technical defects  and construction flaws were found, some of those could  not 
only cause injuries but were potentially life -threatening.  Defects and flaws  were discovered in all 
hotel  and aqua park  classifications . In total, 100 pools were subject of  an undercover investigation.  
 
The surroundings of the pool . In 84 out of 100 cases serious defects and flaws were found in the 
surroundings  of the swimming pool. These defects and flaws included primarily broken grate s of 
overflow gutters and  broken skimm er covers  on which swimmers could cut or  bruise themselves.  
 
The way into the pool.  In 32 out of 100 cases stepladders  and lifts for the disabled were unsecured 
or unsafe. Swimmers could become trapped with limbs in submerged spaces behind the stepladder 
or injure themselves on pipe ends that were not secured with the required  caps. In one case 
7 
 Parents4Safety was the eye witness of a disabled person falling into the pool along with the poorly 
constructed lift . 
 
Inlet nozzles.  In 96 out of 100 cases , one or more inlet nozzles were found to be broken or 
removable by hand . Thereby,  allowing swimmers to stick their fingers and toes into the remaining 
aperture of the nozzle .  
 
Drainage and c leaning intakes.  In 89 of 100 cases , the pools  had submerged cleaning int akes which 
were not secured with the required covering cap.  The grate s of drainage intakes were found to be 
broken, damaged, removable by hand or severely blocked by dirt.  
 
Pool lighting.  In 36 out of 100 cases, p ools ha d flaws in the way lighting is mount ed into the wall or  
how the lighting was designed.  The lighting  along with the wiring could often be pulled out of the 
wall with only a little tensile force.  
 
Separation and identification of swimming and non -swimming areas.  In 22 out o f 100 cases, p ools 
had an unsafe transition from non -swimmer to swimmer areas.  Young children could slip 
underneath a separation between shallow and deep pools or become trapped in the construction  used 
for the separation. The depth indication of pools was not always legible or absent and t he transition 
to a deeper part of the pool was not always visible or marked.  
 
Measurement of water velocity.  In 39 out of 100 cases the w ater velocities at drainage intakes 
exceeded the permitted 0 .5 m/s considerably.  
 
Unsafe constructions.  In 22 out of 100 cases, p ools ha d constructions that are not allowed by the 
European Standard E N 13451 and c ould endanger the swimmers.   
 
 
DISCUSSION  
Entrapment in a swimming pool is a serious problem and has  devastating long term  consequences  
for survivor s and relatives of victims . The relatives of victims are often dragged into lawsuits , 
which may last more than  ten years , before they can start the mourning process of their lost loved 
ones. This study indicates that an increase of reported entrapment acci dents is seen in Europe, while 
a decline in reported acci dents is seen in North America. The large amount of technical defects and 
flaws that were found in undercover inspections condemns many swimming pools at hotels and 
aqua parks to be rated as unsafe f or its users . Some major defects could not only cause minor 
injuries, but were so dangerous that they could be life -threatening . That these pools passed a safety 
inspection of both travel agencies and highly regarded European safety institution s is highly 
questionable . None of  the 100 investigated pools passed our safety inspection  in accordance with 
European Standard  EN 13451 , 69 of those were rated as being in a poor condition and 31 were 
condemned to be very dangerous  and contained life -threatening hazar ds. In some pools swimmers 
could even be electrocuted.  Both tour operators  and owners of hotels and aqua parks have little 
awareness and understanding of pool entrapment and seem to take the safety of their clients for 
granted  (Davison & Puntis, 2003) . Current safety inspections  mainly consi st of visual assessment s. 
Inspector s walk around the pool without entering it, checking off a list.  It should be mandatory by 
law that the owners of pools, but  also those who inspect  pools on safety for tour operators an d 
safety institutions , have to prove that the offered pool facilities are safe  for their users. A detailed 
and documented assessment  of drainage intakes  is urgently required  in European safety inspections 
to guarantee the safety of swimmers  and should  include hair tests and measurements of the water 
velocity and negative gauge pressure . 
8 
 REFERENCES  
Avezaat, J.P.  (2013). Risk a nalysis of swimming pool water circulation systems. Developing safety 
measures and design requirements to exclude entrapment risk. Master’s thesis. Univer sity of 
Twente.  
Blaustein, M.  (2005). See, Hear, Touch! The Basics of Learning Readiness. Developmentally 
Appropriate Practice. Beyond the Journal.  NAEYC.  
Davison, A., Puntis, J. W. L.  (2003). Awareness of swimming pool suction injury a mong tour 
operators. Archives of Disease in Childhood, 88(7), 584 -586. 
European Standard EN 13451 -3+A1. (2013) . Swimming pool equipment. Additional specific 
safety requirements and test methods for inlets and outlets and water/air based water leisure 
featu res. 
Gipson , K. (2012 ). 1999 -2011 Reported Circulation/Suction Entrapments Associated with Pools, 
Spas and Whirlpool Bathtubs, 2012 report. US Consumer Product Safety Commision.  
Gipson, K . (2013). 2008 -2012 Reported Circulation/Suction Entrapments Associat ed with Pools, 
Spas and Whirlpool Bathtubs, 2013 report. US Consumer Product Safety Commision.  
Hnatov, M.V.  (2014). 200 9-2013 Reported Circulation/Suction Entrapment Incidents Associated 
with Pools, Spas and Whirlpool Bathtubs, 2014 report. US Consumer Pro duct Safety Commision.  
Hultman, C.S., Morgan, R. (1994). Transanal intestinal evisceration following suction from an 
uncovered swimming pool drain: case report. The Journal of Trauma. 1994 Nov;37(5):843 -7. 
Juern, J.,Schmeling, D., Feltis, B.  (2010). Transa nal wading pool suction -drain injury resulting in 
complete evisceration of the small intestine: case report and review of the literature.  Journal of 
Pediatric Surgery. 2010 Apr;45(4):E1 -3. 
The Blue Cap Foundation.  (2015). List of pool entrapment accidents.  Available from: 
http://www.thebluecap.com/site/en/accidents  [accessed 21 January 2015].  
US Consumer Product Safety Commission.  (2005). Guidelines for entrapment hazards: making 
pools and spas safer. US Consumer Product Safety Commission.  
World Health Orga nization.  (2006). Guidelines for s afe recreational water environments. Volume 
2: Swimming pools and similar environments. Geneva: World Health Organization . Available from: 
www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/bathing/srwe2full.pdf [accessed 21 January 2015 ]. 
