早稲田大学審査学位論文  
博士（スポーツ科学 ） 
概要書 
 
A kinematic analysis of shoulder and torso during 
front crawl swimming and its implications to 
overuse injuries  
 
クロール泳における肩複合体と腰部の 3次元運動：
慢性障害との関連  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
２０１６年１ 月 
 
早稲田大学大学院  スポーツ科学研究科  
杜 唐慧子 
DU, Tanghuizi  
 
研究指導教員：  矢内 利政 教授 
  
Chapter 1 Introduction  
Overuse i njuries are very common complaints among competitive swimmers . More than half the 
competitive swimmers experience athletic injuries in their career  and most of the  injuries are 
classified as overuse injuries. In swimming, overuse injuries frequently occur at shoulders and low 
back. In general, excessive joint motion has been proposed as a risk  factor for overuse  injuries in 
sports  as it  would generate abnormal  stress to the structures within and around the joint. In 
swimming, torso hyperextension and glenohumeral joint motion  beyond the physiologically 
permissible range of elevation or internal rotation have been postulated as the excess ive joint 
motions responsible for low back pain and shoulder pain , respectively . However, no study has been 
conducted to determine th e three -dimensional movements of low back and glenohumeral joint in 
swimming  and, thereby, n o evidence has been provided to  evaluate if the excessive joint motion 
occurs in swimming, when and how the excessive joint motion occurs during stroke cycles and  the 
relatio nship of excessive joint motion s to overuse  injuries. This thesis was aimed to determine the 
three -dimensional movements of torso and glenohumeral joint during front crawl swimming and to 
evaluate if these joint motions exceed the active range. The findings were expecte d to provide firm 
evidence to  discuss implication s of joint motion s to chronic low back pain and shoulder pain in 
swimming.  
 
Chapter 2 Three -dimensional torso motion in tethered front crawl stroke and its implications 
to low back pain  
A hypothesis that swimmers experience torso hypere xtension consistently across the stroke cycles  
was tested  in this study . Nineteen collegiate swimmers underwent two measurements: a 
measurement of the active range of motion in three dimensions and a measurement of tethered front 
crawl stroke at their maxi mal effort. Torso hyperextension was determined as the extension beyond 
the active range of torso extension for a given amount of torso twist and lateral tilting. It was found 
that the largest torso extension angle exhibited during the stroke cycles was 9 ± 11° and it was 
recorded at or around (0.02 ± 0.08 s) the instant at which torso attained the largest twist angle. No 
participant hyperextended the torso consistently across the stroke cycles  and t he hypothesis was 
rejected. A reason that  swimmers have been  presumed to be hyperextending their torso during front 
crawl swimming m ay be due to that  the complex three -dimensional movement , such as a moderate 
extension of a twisted torso,  has given observers wrong  impression  of the torso configuration in the 
oblique  view  from the pool deck . On the basis of our  additional analysis , we postulate a possibility 
that repeated torso motion beyond a specific section of the active range of motion (e.g. the 
individual neutral zone), rather than the whole range of motion,  may increase the risk of low back 
pain in front crawl swimming.   
The content of this chapter has been accepted for publication in Journal of Applied Biomechanics 
(2015, PMID: 26398960 ). 
 
Chapter 3 Three -dimensional glenohumeral motion in tethered front crawl stroke and its 
implications to shoulder pain  
A hypothesis that glenohumeral joint exceeds  the physiologically permissible range of elevation 
and/or internal rotation during front crawl stroke cycle  was tested in this study . Abnormal stress is 
known to be generated in glenohumeral joint when the humerus was moved  beyond the maximal 
range of elevation and /or the maximum range of humeral internal rotat ion. The glenohumeral joint 
motion s that satisfied these criteria were detected for 17 co llegiate swimmers . The results showed 
that the average duration over which the glenohumeral joint exhibited excessive motions was 
limited to 8% of the time spent in one stroke cycle. T he excessive elevation at glenohumeral joint 
was observed in 2 subjects  during the stretch phase and  the excessive internal rotation  was observed 
in 15 subjects  in the outsweep phase, the first half of the insweep phase, and the second half of the 
recovery phase . Interestingly, visually observable excessive motion s at shoulder  (e.g., excessive 
elevation at the stretch phase)  were  found to occur much less likely than not-so-easily observable 
excessive motion s (e.g., excessive internal rotation in sweep and recovery phases) . These 
observations suggest that the coaches and trainer s may not recognize if a given swimmer is at risk 
of developing shoulder pain.  On the basis of the literature in  which the structures at risk of 
abnormal stress are reported in various arm positions , the glenohumeral joint structures at risk of 
developing abnormal stress during stroke cycles of front crawl swimming may vary across the 
stroke phases . In the hand entry phase the acromion and the tuberosity of humerus may be subject to 
bone -to-bone contact stress and the articular surface of rotator cuff and t he labrum are subject to 
compressive stress due to internal impingement; in the stretch phase the supraspinatus ligament may 
be subject to a contact pressure under the coraco -acromial arch; and in outsweep phase 
supraspinatus tendon may be subject to a con tact pressure under the acromion and also to a 
compressive stress due to internal impingement.   
Part of this chapter was published as a refereed c onference proceeding of  the 31st International 
Conference on Biomechanics in Sports (2013) .  
 
Chapter 4 General discussion  
The findings of each section of the thesis have provided the evidence that the excessive  joint motion 
on glenohumeral joint occur s in resisted front crawl swimming while the excessive  joint motion on  
torso does not. Because of the complex three -dimensional movement  of the joint, t he general 
impression  of the visually observable excessive motion  may misleading the “real” excessive joint 
motion in swimming and hide the ri sk of developing chronic injury  from coaches and trainer . It 
suggested that the  joint movement  during swimming should be determined in details and with 
considering the movement not in one plane but cross to the three dimensions.  The major limitation 
of the present study was that the swimmers were asked to swim  in a tethered condition, rather than 
the normal “free” swimming condition. Effects of the difference in the measurement  condition were 
evaluated  by applying a new methodology that we developed recently  and confirmed that the 
excessive joint motion occurs in glenohumeral joint  during multi phases  of front crawl swimming 
but not in low back . 
