See discussions, st ats, and author pr ofiles f or this public ation at : https://www .researchgate.ne t/public ation/283323080
Hamstring Inju ry After Swimming in a Patient With Multiple Hereditary
Osteochondromatosis
Article    in  Clinic al Journal of Sport Medicine  · Oct ober 2015
DOI: 10.1097/ JSM.0000000000000266
CITATION
1READS
415
3 author s:
Gurhan Donme z
Hac ettepe Univ ersity
108 PUBLICA TIONS    973 CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
Levent Ö zçakar
Hac ettepe Univ ersity
922 PUBLICA TIONS    9,117  CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
Feza Korkusuz
Hac ettepe Univ ersity
226 PUBLICA TIONS    5,015  CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
All c ontent f ollo wing this p age was uplo aded b y Gurhan Donme z on 19 Mar ch 2016.
The user has r equest ed enhanc ement of the do wnlo aded file.
CASEREPORT
Hamstring Injury After Swimming in a Patient With
Multiple Hereditary Osteochondromatosis
Gürhan Dönmez, MD, *Levent Özçakar, MD, †and Feza Korkusuz, MD *
Abstract: Reported here is a 20-year-old male suffered a hamstring
strain after a prolonged bout of swimming. After ultrasound imaging,the patient ’s injury was considered to be the result of nearby
osteochondromas. Case reports have been previously published con-
cerning anterior cruciate ligament injury, rotator cuff tears, subacro-mial impingement, or femoroacetabular impingement in multiple
osteochondromatosis. However, to the best of our knowledge, this
is the ﬁrst reported case of a hamstring injury secondary to an
osteochondroma.
Key Words: osteochondromatosis, exostosis, semimembranosus,
strain, ultrasound
(Clin J Sport Med 2015;0:1 –2)
INTRODUCTION
Osteochondromas, or exostoses, the most common
benign bone tumors, can arise in any bone and are commonlyfound in the bones of the lower extremities.
1In clinical prac-
tice, lower extremity exostoses usually manifest as a painless
mass around a joint (ie, distal femur or proximal tibia) or assigns and symptoms because of mechanical irritation of thesurrounding soft tissues.
2In this report, we aimed to present
a patient with hereditary multiple osteochondromas (heredi-
tary multiple exostoses) who suffered a semimembranosustear after swimming.
CASE REPORT
A 20-year-old male patient presented to the sports medicine
department after 2 weeks of posterior left thigh pain and limping. Hedescribed the onset of symptoms to have started after 6 hours ofswimming activity, after which he felt a sudden cramp-like muscle
pain in his left thigh, associated with subsequent bruising in his thigh
and calf. He declared that a large ecchymotic area also ensued in histhigh and calf. He had been previously seen at an outside medical
facility, where rest and a nonsteroidal antiin ﬂammatory treatment
had been advised. Three days later, as his complaints had worsened,magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) had been performed, and a partialrupture of the distal part of his left semimembranosus muscle had
been detected.
On physical examination, a large ecchymosis was still
present on the posterior side o f the left lower limb, starting
from the thigh extending down to the distal cruris (Figure 1A).
The distal one-third of the hamstring muscles were painful to
palpation, and end range knee ﬂexion and extension were painful.
The rest of his neuromusculoskel etal examination was otherwise
normal.
On musculoskeletal ultrasound (US), a large hematoma and
a suspicious lesion for myositis ossi ﬁcans within the semimembra-
nosus muscle were observed (Figure 1B). Detailed medical/family
history taking revealed that the patient also had hereditary multiple
osteochondromatosis. Repeat US imaging, plain radiographs, andMRI were also consistent with this diagnosis (Figures 1C and 2).Because he refused surgical excision, the patient is currently under
conservative treatment (rest, cold, antiin ﬂammatory medication) for
muscle strain.
DISCUSSION
Hereditary multiple osteochondromatosis, also known
as hereditary multiple exostoses, is a relatively rare genetic
disorder characterized by the presence of multiple osteochon-dromas.
3Although the lesions are most commonly seen in the
metaphyses of long bones, they may appear on diaphyses of
long and ﬂat bones as well. The diagnosis is based on clinical
and/or radiographic ﬁndings of multiple exostoses in the fam-
ily members. Osteochondromas can be associated with
a reduction in skeletal growth, limb-length discrepancy, bonydeformity, restricted joint motion, postural joint abnormali-ties, shortened stature, premature osteoarthrosis, and com-
pression of peripheral nerves. Malignant transformation of
an osteochondroma to osteochondrosarcoma occurs in 1%to 5% of the patients and more commonly occurs with in-
creases with age.
4
According to the localization and morphological fea-
tures of the osteochondromas, the clinical complications due
to compression are varied, for example, chest pain, sponta-
neous hemo/pneumothorax, pericardial effusion, spinal cordcompression, peripheral nerve, and vessel injury.
5–7Muscu-
lotendinous injuries due to osteochondromas are relatively
rare in the literature and include snapping left medial ham-string tendon, involvement of the anterior cruciate ligament,rotator cuff tears, and subacromial or ischiofemoral or femo-
roacetabular impingement.
2,8–10Furthermore, to the author ’s
knowledge, a muscle injury due to exostoses has not beenreported in the literature. Considering that signi ﬁcant eccen-
tric loading (the primary causative factor for hamstring strain)
was not present in our case, the underlying osteochondromaSubmitted for publication August 12, 2014; accepted March 16, 2015.
From the Departments of *Sports Medicine; and †Physical and Rehabilitation
Medicine, Hacettepe University Medical School, Ankara, Turkey.
The authors report no con ﬂicts of interest.
Corresponding Author: Gürhan Dönmez, MD, Department of Sports
Medicine, Hacettepe Üniversitesi T ıp Fakültesi Hastaneleri Spor
Hekimli /C21gi AD, S ıhhiye, 06100 Ankara, Turkey (gurhan.donmez@
hacettepe.edu.tr).
Copyright © 2015 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Clin J Sport Med /C15Volume 0, Number 0, Month 2015 www.cjsportmed.com |1
Copyright /C2112015 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
at the posterior distal part of the left femur might have pre-
disposed/contributed to the rupture of his semimembranosusmuscle.
Regarding the differentia l diagnosis, we imply that
complementary use of US and x-ray imaging is noteworthyin the prompt diagnosis and management of musculoskel-
etal injuries. Yet, although US imaging is paramount in the
early diagnosis and fol low-up of myositis ossi ﬁcans, an
underlying bony pathology can be better depicted with
simple x-rays. However, the pr ecise association of a hema-
toma/strain and exostoses is more likely to be shown withUS imaging.
In conclusion, we believe that osteochondromas should
also be considered in the differential diagnosis of musclelesions, especially when the medical history and the extent ofinjury are inconsistent. Furthermore, the concomitant use of
US and radiographic imaging is suggested for better diagnosis
and management. Finally, for professional athletes, a pro-phylactic excision may be considered depending on the
particular sports discipline and localization of the osteochon-
droma(s).REFERENCES
1. Kitsoulis P, Galani V, Stefanaki K, et al. Osteochondromas: review of the
clinical, radiological and pathological features. In Vivo. 2008;22:633 –646.
2. Yoong-Leong Oh J, Tan KK, Wong YS. “Snapping ”knee secondary to
a tibial osteochondroma. Knee . 2008;15:58 –60.
3. Stieber JR, Dormans JP. Manifestations of hereditary multiple exostoses.
J Am Acad Orthop Surg. 2005;13:110 –120.
4. Ozaki T, Hillmann A, Blasius S, et al. Multicentric malignant transfor-
mation of multiple exostoses. Skeletal Radiol. 1998;27:233 –236.
5. Assefa D, Murphy RC, Bergman K, et al. Three faces of costal exostoses:
case series and review of literature. Pediatr Emerg Care. 2011;27:1188 –1191.
6. Göçmen S, Topuz AK, Atabey C, et al. Peripheral nerve injuries due to
osteochondromas: analysis of 20 cases and review of the literature.
J Neurosurg. 2014;120:1105 –1112.
7. Pavi /C19c P, Vergles D, Sarlija M, et al. Pseudoaneurysm of the popliteal
artery in a patient with multiple hereditary exostoses. Ann Vasc Surg.
2011;25:268.e1 –2.
8. Huang TF, Wu JJ, Chen TS. Bilateral shoulder bursal osteochondroma-
tosis associated with complete rotator cuff tear. J Shoulder Elbow Surg.
2004;13:108 –111.
9. De Ferm A, Lagae K, Bunker T. Synovial osteochondromatosis: an unusual
cause for subacromial impingement. Acta Orthop Belg. 1997;63:218 –220.
10. Viala P, Vanel D, Larbi A, et al. Bilateral ischiofemoral impingement in
a patient with hereditary multiple exostoses. Skeletal Radiol. 2012;41:
1637 –1640.
FIGURE 1. Photograph of the
patient showing the ecchymosis onthe left lower limb (A). Ultrasoundimaging demonstrates the area of
strain (asterisks) and the exostosis
(arrowheads) on axial (B) and lon-gitudinal (C) views.
FIGURE 2. Lateral knee x-ray dem-
onstrates the exostoses in the distal
part of femur (arrow) and the proxi-mal tibia (arrowhead). Magneticresonance imaging (T2-weighted
coronal image) reveals exostosis
(arrow) at the medial part of leftdistal femoral metaphysis and sur-rounding edematous, hyperintense
signal changes at the distal part of
left semimembranosus muscle.Dönmez et al Clin J Sport Med /C15Volume 0, Number 0, Month 2015
2|www.cjsportmed.com Copyright © 2015 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Copyright /C2112015 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
View publication stats
