 
 CASE STUDIES OF ASYMMETRIES IN  SWIMMING  
Ross Sanders1,3, Carla McCabe1, Alison Alcock2, Louise Wright2, Neil Donald2, 
Irene Riach2, and Malcolm Fairweather2 
Centre for Aquatics Research and Education, Institute for Sport, Physical 
Education, and Health Sciences, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK1 
Sportscotland Institute, Stirling, UK2  
Exercise and Sport Science, Faculty of Health Science s, The University of 
Sydney3 
An interrelated influence of strength, flexibility, anthropometric and technique asymmetries 
affects performance in swimming. Underpinning aetiologies include both acquired and 
inherited factors. The combination of factors vari es among swimmers and therefore 
demands a multi -disciplinary case study approach to identify and correct asymmetries to 
improve performance and reduce incidence of injuries. The purpose of this presentation is to 
provide examples of analyses informing indi vidualised interventions to correct asymmetries. 
Interventions comprise programmes of strength, flexibility, posture, and technique 
refinement. Analyses included measures of strength on the Biodex, measures of strength, 
posture, flexibility and anthropomet ry based on the International Society for the 
Advancement of Kinesiology (ISAK) conventions, and video -based qualitative and 
quantitative three -dimensional analysis of technique. Sample data of a breaststroke 
swimmer and a backstroke swimmer are presented to illustrate the interrelationships among 
strength, flexibility, posture, technique and performance.    
 
KEY WORDS: swimming, asymmetries, technique, strength, flexibility, posture, 
performance  
  
INTRODUCTION:  Bilateral and antero -posterior asymmetries can arise from many different 
influences (see Sanders et al, 2011, for a review). Figure 1 provides a summary of the main 
categories of influences.  
Figure 1:   A Model of Factors Associated with Asymmetry in Swimm ers  
 
Swimming performance depends on optimsiation of propulsion within the physiological 
constraints of the swimmer and minimisation of resistive forces. Asymmetries can affect the 
swimming technique and performance via their effects on both propulsion an d resistance as 
well as physiological economy (see Sanders, 2013 for a review).  
While there are many infuencing factors it must be recognised that cause and effect are 
interlinked and that the asymmetry profile of a swimmer is changing dynamically. Indeed , a 
‘viscious cycle‘ among postural deficits, muscular deficits, and asymmetries (figure 2) 
demands regular monitoring of swimmers and adjustment of training regimens to ensure that 
asymmetries that affect performance are minimised. Therefore, diagnosis an d remediation of 
asymmetries  requires a multi -disciplinary approach involving biomechanics, anthropometry, 
strength and conditioning, and physiotherapy. Also, i t is critial that the coach is involved in all 
of the data collection, diagnosis, and intervent ion processes.  

 
  
Figure 2:   A ‘vicious cycle‘  cause and effect among postural deficits, muscular 
developments and asymmetry  of  swimmers.   
 
METHODS:  
Ten elite Scottish swimmers participated in a longitudinal study funded by sportscotland . The 
model in F igure 1 was applied to ensure that all relevant information about individual 
swimmers was collected. Consequently, a questionnaire was used to obtain information 
regarding laterality, side dominance and handedness, history of injuries, breathing side 
prefe rence and percentage of breathing on each side during training. Anthropometric 
variables including limb lengths and girths and joint ranges of motion were measured in 
accordance with  International Society for the Advancement of Kinesiology (ISAK) guideline s. 
Posture was assessed in terms of thoracic and lumbar angles in the sagittal plane, indicating 
kyphosis and lordosis respectively, applying  the protocol established by Fairweather and 
Sidaway (1993).  
Strength data for right and left shoulder flexion and extension, shoulder internal and external 
rotation and knee flexion and extension were obtained on a Biodex isokinetic dynamometer 
for 12 repetitions at 60 degrees and 180 degrees per second. Speeds, sides, and exercise 
order were randomised.  
Video data we re collected from front and side views above and below the water surface for 
qualitative analysis of a swimmer in a non -fatigued state. Data were also collected for 
subsequent three -dimensional analysis by four video underwater video cameras and two 
above water video cameras with their axes oblique to the axes of the three -dimensional 
calibration frame (Psyc harakis, Sanders, and Mill, 2005 ) while the swimmers performed a 
fatigue set comprising four maximal effort 100m swims in their main competitive stroke.   
The three -dimensional kinematic and kinetic analysis was based on a full body model of 
manually digitised landmarks using a bespoke MATLAB analysis program (Sanders, 2005). 
Body segment parameter data were obtained by PC software (Deffeyes and Sanders, 2 005) 
applying the elliptical zone method (Jensen, 1978).   
The longitudinal study comprises a pre -test, analysis, concurrent strength/conditioning, 
physiotherapy, and technique interventions, post -test, and second analysis with comparison 
to assess the effect of the interventions. Currently the pre -test and first analysis have been 
completed.  
  

 
 
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 
1-3 2-3 3-3 4-3 Average Pull Speed (m/s)  
Left 
Right  RESULTS  AND  DISCUSSION:  
Given that every individual has a unique profile of asymmetries two case studies , a female 
breaststroke swimmer, and a male backstroke swimmer,  are presented to illustrate the 
interactive nature of c auses and effects.  
 
Case Study 1  
Descriptive data for Case Study 1 are provided in Table 1.  
 
Table 1: Descriptive Data for Case Study 1.  
Gender  Female  
Age 21 yrs 11 months  
Specialist events  50/100m Brst  
Personal best  1.10.85  100m (LC)  
Level  International – 3yrs 
Injuries  L Intercostal, R ankle, L3 disk  
Breathing (front crawl)  Right unilateral  
Laterality  Right hand and foot  
 
Strength, Flexibility, and Posture  
The Biodex results revealed that this swimmer was stronger in the right shoulder than the left   
in flexion and extension. This could be linked to her right side dominance and  also to the 
effects of left intercostal injury. The left  knee was stronger than the right in flexion despite the 
right side dominance. This may be linked to the history of right ankle injury.  
This swimmer had poor scores for lumbar extension strength and flexibility. She also had a 
large lumbar curve, which may result from the pelvis tilting forwards as a result of decreased 
hip flexibility.  
 
Technique  
This breaststroke swimmer had a slight lean to the right side and the left shoulder, hip, and 
lower limbs tended to be higher throughout the stroke than the right. The hand on the right 
side completed its pull prior to the left an d led the left hand in recovery.  
  
 
 
Figure 3. Average hand speed during the pull phase for the 3rd 25m of each the four hundred 
metre swims of the fatigue set.  
 
This could be linked to greater strength on the right side and the left side intercostal injury. 
This possibility was reinforced by the results for average pull speed of the hand (figure 3 ) 
indicating that the right hand moved faster than the left. The imb alance o f forces created yaw 
rotation  (rotation about the vertical axis) of the trunk as shown in figure 4.  
 
  
Figure 4 . Yaw angle of the trunk for the 3rd 25m of each of the four hundred metre swims of 
the fatigue set.  
   
It is likely that the yaw rotatio n affects stre amlining and increases resistance thereby reducing 
performance. There was also a lack of hip extension to adopt a streamlined position during 
the glide phase.  
Thus, the planned intervention includes strength and conditoning to correct the imb alances in 
shoulder and knee strength, strength and conditioning of hip and lumbar flexion and extension 
combined with flexibility exercises to correct muscle balance and pelvic orientation, and 
technique intervention to attain symmetry of hand path and sp eed during the pull.   
 
Case Study 2  
Descriptive data for Case Study 2 are provided in Table 1.  
 
Table 1: Descriptive Data for Case Study 1.  
Gender  Male  
Age 21yrs 7 months  
Specialist events  100/200 Backstroke  
Personal best  54.88; 1.59.12  
Relevant Injuries  Right shoulder impingement  
Level  International - 8 years  
Breathing side (front crawl)  Left; 50/50  
Laterality  Left hand and foot  
 
Strength, Flexibility, and Posture  
The Biodex data indicated left side strength dominance in shoulder flexion and extension, 
shoulder internatl and external rotation, and knee flexion and extension. This swimmer had 
large thoracic curve and a large lumbar curve.  
 
Technique  
The technique wa s predominantly symmetrical enabling good maintenance of streamlined 
alignment. However, there was strong evidence that the left hand produced more force than 
the right. This corresponded to the left shoulder being stronger in flexion/extension and 
interna l/external rotation measured on the Biodex.  
 -10 -5 0 5 10 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 Yaw (degrees)  
Time % Cycle  Yaw 
1-3 
2-3 
3-3 
4-3 
 
  
Figure 5. Average hand speed in the X direction during the pull phase for the 3rd 25m of each 
the four hundred metre swims of the fatigue set.  
 
The imbalance of forces created a small yawing effect of the trunk as shown in figure 6.  
 
Figure 6. Yaw angle of the trunk for the 3rd 25m of each of the four hundred metre swims of 
the fatigue set.  
   
The alternating pull of right and left hand produced small yawing effects as shown in figure 6. 
These effects were largely offset by the leg actions. The slight asymmetries in motion of the 
legs, required to counterbalance the uneven rotational effects of the left and right pulls, may 
have an effect on body alignment and resistive drag.  
Thus, the internventions planned for thjis swimmer include strength and conditioning to 
improve bilateral balance of right and left shoulder strength, strengthening of shoulder 
extensor and external rotator muscles to improve anterio -posterior muscle balance, posture 
and reduce kyphosis, establishment of hip and lumbar flexor and extensor balance to improve 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 
1-3 2-3 3-3 4-3 Average X Pull Speed (m/s)  
Left 
Right  
-10 -5 0 5 10 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 Yaw (degrees)   
Time % Cycle  Yaw 
1-3 
2-3 
3-3 
4-3 
 
 posture and reduce lordosis. Technique will be monitored to ensure that yawing effects are 
balanced bilaterally to optimis e streamlining throughout the stroke cycle.  
 
CONCLUSION:  
These two case studies have illustrated the interaction of strength, flexibility, posture, and 
technique asymmetries and their likely effects on performance in swimming. The results for 
the other ei ght swimmers in the study also revealed links between these factors. However, 
each swimmer had a unique combination of asymmetries.    
 
REFERENCES:  
Deffeyes, J., and Sanders, R.H. (2005). Elliptical zone body segment modeling software: Digitising, 
modeling  and body segment parameter calculation. In Q. Wang (ed.) Proceedings of XXIII International 
Symposium on Biomechanics in Sport s. The China Institute of Sports Science, Beijing, pp. 749 -752.  
Fairweather, M.M., and B. Sidaway (1993). Ideokinetic imagery as  a postural development technique. 
Research Quarterly , 64. 385 -392. 
Psycharakis, S.G., Sanders, R.H., and Mill, F. (2005). A calibration frame for 3D analysis of swimming.  
In  Q. Wang (ed.) Proceedings of XXIII International Symposium on Biomechanics in Sports . The 
China Institute of Sports Science, Beijing, pp. 901 -904. 
Sanders, R.H.  (2013). How do asymmetries affect swimming performance? Journal of Swimming 
Science. In press.  
Sanders, R.H., Thow, J., Alcock, A., Fairweather, M. Riach, I, and Mather, F.  (2012). How can 
asymmetries in swimming be measured? Journal of Swimming Science, Vol 19, Spring, 2012.  
http://www.swimmingcoach.org /Journal/index.html   
Sanders, R.H., Thow, J., and Fairweather, M. (2011). Asymmetries in swimming: Where do they come 
from? Journal of Swimming Science, Vol 18, Fall 2011 . 
http://www.swimmingcoach.org/Journal/index.html  
Sanders, R,H. (2005). Swim3D. Unpublished MATLAB software.  
 
Acknowledgement  
The authors acknowledge the funding support of sportscotland and assistance with data colle ction and 
processing by Jacki Thow, Nuno Olivier, Chuang -Yuan Chiu, Tomohiro Gonjo, Yuan Chiu, Kostas 
Kalitsis, and Marlies Declerck.  
  
