Effects of Swimming on Functional Recovery after Incomplete
Spinal Cord Injury in Rats
Rebecca R. Smith , Alice Shum-Siu , Ryan Baltzley , Michelle Bunger , Angela Baldini , Darlene
A. Burke , and David S.K. Magnuson
Kentucky Spinal Cord Injury Research Center, Department of Neurological Surgery, University of
Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville, Kentucky
Abstract
One of the most promising rehabilitation strategies for spinal cord injury is weight-supported
treadmill training. This strategy seeks to re-train the spinal cord below the level of injury to generate
a meaningful pattern of movement. However, the number of step cycles that can be accomplished is
limited by the poor weight-bearing capability of the neuromuscular system after injury. We have
begun to study swimming as a rehabilitation strategy that allows for high numbers of steps and a
high step-cycle frequency in a standard rat model of contusive spinal cord injury. The purpose of the
present study was to evaluate the effect of swimming as a rehabilitation strategy in rats with contusion
injuries at T9. We used a swimming strategy with or without cutaneous feedback based on original
work in the chick by Muir and colleagues. Adult female rats ( n = 27) received moderately-severe
contusion injuries at T9. Walking and swimming performance were evaluated using the Open-Field
Locomotor Scale (BBB; Basso et al., 1995) and a novel swimming assessment, the Louisville
Swimming Scale (LSS). Rats that underwent swim-training with or without cutaneous feedback
showed a significant improvement in hindlimb function during swimming compared to untrained
animals. Rats that underwent swim-training without cutaneous feedback showed less improvement
than those trained with cutaneous feedback. Rats in the non-swimming group demonstrated little
improvement over the course of the study. All three groups showed the expected improvement in
over-ground walking and had similar terminal BBB scores. These findings suggest that animals re-
acquire the ability to swim only if trained and that cutaneous feedback improves the re-training
process. Further, these data suggest that the normal course of recovery of over-ground walking
following moderately-severe contusion injuries at T9 is the result of a re-training process.
Keywords
contusion injury; rehabilitation; re-training; swimming
Introduction
Hindlimb Stepping during locomotion in mammals is thought to involve descending pathways
that originate in the midbrain (mesencephalic locomotor region; MLR), pass through relays in
the ventromedial medulla (VMM), to descend in the ventral white matter of the spinal cord to
the lumbar enlargement (Jordan, 1998). These descending locomotor command fibers are
thought to innervate central pattern generating circuitry (CPG) located in the rostral part of the
lumbar enlargement serving to initiate and maintain hindlimb stepping during locomotion
(Noga et al., 1995; Magnuson et al., 1999; Hadi et al., 2000; Loy et al., 2002). Functional
Address reprint requests to: David S.K. Magnuson, Ph.D., Kentucky Spinal Cord Injury Research Center, Department of Neurological
Surgery, MDR Rm. 616, University of Louisville, 511 S. Floyd St., Louisville, KY 40292, dsmagn01@gwise.louisville.edu.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
J Neurotrauma . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 March 3.
Published in final edited form as:
J Neurotrauma . 2006 June ; 23(6): 908±919. doi:10.1089/neu.2006.23.908.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
evidence of the MLR-VMM-CPG pathway can be observed during fictive locomotion,
recorded from hindlimb nerves in pharmacologically paralyzed, decerebrate cats, which can
be elicited using a constant stimulus of 15 hz in the MLR (Shik et al., 1966; Noga et al.,
1991) or brainstem (Shefchyk et al., 1990). Hindlimb stepping on a treadmill can also be
induced by MLR stimulation, even when one hindlimb is completely deafferented, and is often
maintained for some time following bilateral hindlimb deafferentation ( Grillner and Zangger,
1984). The pattern of hindlimb muscle activation during MLR stimulation in a deafferented
cat is very similar to the intact animal, apart from the response amplitudes of key extensor
muscles which are reduced compared to normal, leading to a relatively flexed limb position
during stance (Grillner and Zangger, 1975, 1984). These and other detailed observations
(Hiebert and Pearson, 1999) suggest that afferent feedback plays an important role in regulating
limb extension (weight-bearing) during the stance phase of stepping, but that the underlying
pattern of the centrally generated rhythmic activity is not dependent on phasic descending or
afferent input. The underlying rhythm appears to be a function of the intrinsic characteristics
of the neurons and circuitry in the spinal cord.
Thus, functional locomotion requires both supraspinal inputs, which serve to initiate and
maintain locomotor movements, and afferent feedback from the limbs that modulates the step
cycle (Grillner, 1975). Three different types of afferent feedback are thought to play important
roles in the various phases of locomotion (Grillner, 1975; Muir and Steeves, 1995). First of
all, proprioceptive input from muscle spindles and Golgi tendon organs signal limb-loading
during the stance phase and limb position throughout the step cycle (Pearson et al., 1993).
Secondly, afferent input from joint capsules signal the extremes of limb position. Hip joint
afferents in particular are effective at triggering of the transition from stance to swing phases
(Grillner et. al, 1975; Muir and Steeves, 1995). Finally, feedback from cutaneous receptors
signal plantar foot contact during stance and dorsal foot contact during swing if an obstacle is
encountered or the foot is dragging (Muir and Steeves, 1995; Bouyer and Rossignol, 2003).
Following spinal cord injury, descending input onto interneurons of the CPG is reduced while
afferent inputs remain intact. Deficits in hindlimb function during walking are proportional to
white matter loss in the ventral half of the spinal cord following contusion or laceration injuries
or demyelination of the thoracic spinal cord (Basso et al., 1996; Schuct et al. 2002; Loy et al.
2002). For more than two decades, hindlimb afferents have been used to activate and re-train
spinal cord locomotor circuitry in a variety of animal models. Studies in rats (Multon et al.,
2003), chicks (Muir and Steeves, 1995), and humans (Harkema et al., 1997; Abel et al.,
2002; Hicks et al., 2003) have revealed that locomotor training after incomplete spinal cord
injury leads to improved function. Barbeau and Rossignol (1987) demonstrated that, even
following complete spinal transection, adult cats could be taught to walk if trained on a
treadmill with body weight support and a strong afferent drive provided by pinching the tail
or stimulating the perineal region. In this paradigm, several weeks of intensive training is
required suggesting that the amount of activity may play a role in re-activating or re-training
the spinal cord circuitry required for normal oscillatory function.
In order for walking to be reestablished however, a small amount of cutaneous input must be
present. A recent study by Bouyer and Rossignol (2003) used a cat model of weight-supported
treadmill rehabilitation to demonstrate that spinalized animals could be re-trained to walk on
a treadmill provided that some cutaneous inputs to the hindpaw were left intact. Even with
progressive loss of cutaneous afferents, the cats regained function with re-training. Complete
absence of cutaneous inputs, however, resulted in permanent loss of plantar placing and weight
bearing during locomotion despite several months of re-training (Bouyer and Rossignol,
2003). These observations indicate that cutaneous afferent input from the paw is a critical
component of weight-supported treadmill training in spinalized cats.Smith et al. Page 2
J Neurotrauma . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 March 3.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Clinical rehabilitation after moderate and severe spinal cord injuries, however, can be more
problematic due to the fact that most patients with ASIA grade C or D injuries have difficulty
achieving weight-bearing limb movements without external support (Dietz et al., 1994 , 1995;
Harkema et al., 1997; Abel et al., 2002; Maegele et al., 2002; Pepin et al., 2003). In rodents,
swimming is a form of locomotion that involves repetitive stepping-like movements of
unloaded limbs. Unlike treadmill walking, which employs a harness to support body weight,
swimming relies on natural buoyancy as a means of weight support. In addition to the buoyancy,
another potential advantage of employing swimming as a rehabilitation strategy in rats after
experimental spinal cord injury over treadmill walking is that swimming involves a higher
number of step cycles being produced by the central pattern generator circuitry. Thus
swimming may allow moderately and severely injured rats to achieve more step cycles during
a given training period than they would with traditional treadmill training.
Swimming and walking are naturally occurring behaviors in both rats and chicks that share
some important features including the phasic relationship between the right and left alternation
of limb flexion and extension. During swimming, however, both cutaneous feedback and
loading of the limbs are significantly reduced compared to the levels during walking (Muir and
Steeves, 1995). While sensory feedback has been shown to contribute to the recovery of
locomotor function after spinal cord injury (Edgerton et al., 1992, Muir and Steeves, 1995;
Harkema et al., 1997), only one study (Muir and Steeves, 1995) has looked at the specific role
of cutaneous, or exteroceptive, feedback in the recovery of hindlimb function following an
incomplete injury. They examined the role of phasic cutaneous feedback during swimming in
spinal cord injured chicks. Since swimming normally involves very low levels of both
proprioceptive (loading) and cutaneous feedback, the latter was provided by adding buoyant
centrifuge tubes suspended from the bottom of the pool that touched the feet of the chicks
during swimming. This model allowed Muir and colleagues to isolate the effects of cutaneous
feedback on hindlimb locomotion. Results from this study showed an improvement in hindlimb
function in chicks that were exposed to phasic cutaneous feedback compared to chicks that
swam without this input. Since rats are also natural swimmers and to date no other study has
examined the role of cutaneous feedback in locomotor recovery in these animals, we
hypothesized that cutaneous feedback would be beneficial to locomotor re-training of rats with
incomplete spinal cord injuries.
The current study examines the role of swimming, with and without cutaneous feedback on
locomotor recovery after incomplete spinal cord injury in rats. We have chosen to focus on
animals with moderately-severe contusion injuries of the thoracic spinal cord because the
majority of these animals recover some degree of weight-supported stepping, but have severe
and persistent deficits in hindlimb function during over-ground walking (Basso et al., 1995,
1996; Magnuson et al., 1999). It is our hypothesis that animals involved in a swimming-based
rehabilitation program will show greater functional recovery than untrained animals as assessed
by the Basso, Beattie, and Bresnahan (BBB) Open-Field Locomotor Scale (Basso et al.,
1995) and a novel assessment developed in our laboratory, the Louisville Swimming Scale
(LSS). Furthermore, we hypothesize that cutaneous feedback during swimming will lead to
enhanced locomotor performance in both the open field and in the water.
Methods
Pre-Training and Testing
One week prior to surgery, animals were exposed to the swimming pool for several minutes
per day for 5 consecutive days. During this time the research personnel responsible for
swimming and testing handled the animals on a daily basis and fed them sweetened cereal as
treats. Rats are natural swimmers and were quickly acclimatized to the swimming sessions.
The swimming pool is a Plexiglas chamber 60-in long, 7-in wide, and 12-in deep, that providesSmith et al. Page 3
J Neurotrauma . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 March 3.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
a nominal swimming distance of 48 inches. There is an adjustable ramp at one end of the pool
covered with a computer mouse pad that provides exceptionally good traction to allow even
injured animals to exit the pool. The pool has a plexiglass lid that is easily removed and covers
all but 8–10 inches of the pool length. The lid was designed to slide freely along the length of
the pool to expose either the exit ramp or the entry point at the far end of the pool. The pool
was filled to a depth of 8 inches with warm tap water (27–30°C) for each swimming session
and was thoroughly cleaned daily. Each animal was carefully transferred from its home cage
to the far end of the pool, opposite the ramp. The lid was slid over the entry point of the pool
to prevent their exit until they reached the ramp. Uninjured or minimally injured animals rapidly
learn to swim to the ramp to get out or to wait to be transferred back to the far end of the pool.
In practice, it takes approximately 3–4 sec of swimming and 4–5 sec of transfer time per lap.
In this way, upwards of 30 laps can be completed in each 4-min session. We conducted three
4-min sessions each morning and afternoon for each animal, totaling 24 min of swimming per
day. Uninjured or mildly injured animals use 12–15 complete “step” cycles (flexion-extension
of each hindlimb) to swim the length of the pool, which means that the spinal cord will produce
between 360 and 450 step cycles per 4-min swimming session, or up to 2700 step cycles each
day after spending a total of 24 min in the pool.
Cutaneous Feedback
Cutaneous feedback during swimming was provided by inverted centrifuge tubes suspended
from a stainless steel grid on fishing line. The tubes used were the standard 1.5-mL size with
snap lids. Each row consisted of eight tubes placed 12 mm apart. Alternate rows were staggered
and rows were separated by 10 mm. This resulted in the maximum possible density of tubes
given the 1.0 × 1.3 mm cap size (cap lip adds 0.3 mm in one direction). The tubes are suspended
approximately 4–5 inches from the plate (to the top of the tube) ensuring that the animals
contact the tubes but have great difficulty making contact with the metal plate. The tubes
provide cutaneous feedback that feels to our fingers like trying to grasp small ice cubes floating
in water, but without the cold. There is definite contact, but little in the way of resistance or
support.
Spinal Cord Injury
Twenty-seven female Sprague-Dawley rats weighing 160–200 g were used for these
experiments. All procedures involving experimental animals were performed according to the
guidelines of the University of Louisville Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (1996).
Each animal was anesthetized with Nembutol sodium solution (0.8 cc/100 g, i.p.) and was
given prophylactic antibiotics (gentomycin sulfate, 15 mg/kg, s.c). Body temperatures were
continuously monitored during surgery and were maintained at 36–37°C until the animal
recovered from the anesthetic. A dorsal midline incision was made over the mid-thoracic spinal
cord. A single level laminectomy was performed at the T9 vertebra. The spine was immobilized
using clamps applied to the T8 and T10 spinous processes. The NYU Impactor (W. Young,
Rutgers, NJ) was used to produce moderately-severe (25 g-cm) weight-drop contusion injuries
centered on the T10 segment of the spinal cord. After injury, the wounds were closed in layers
and a topical antibiotic ointment was applied to the incision. The animals were placed in
recovery cages on heating pads until they recovered from the anesthesia. Injured animals were
housed individually and received daily post-operative care, including manual bladder
expression until adequate spontaneous voiding occurred. Five animals served as controls and
received laminectomies without contusion injuries.
Training Design
Prior to training the animals were randomly divided into three groups: group 1, trained with
cutaneous feedback ( n = 8); group 2, trained without cutaneous feedback ( n = 7); and group 3Smith et al. Page 4
J Neurotrauma . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 March 3.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
untrained ( n = 7). On post-injury days 14–17, the animals were placed in the water for one 4-
min training session per day, and were assisted by the handlers when necessary. On post-injury
days 21–23, the animals were trained for two (day 21) or three (days 22 and 23) 4-min sessions
per day, according to their capabilities as a group. By day 24, few of the animals required
assistance but all still relied on their forelimbs for forward motion. On post-injury days 28–67
(the final phase of training), the animals trained for three 4-min sessions each morning and
afternoon (total of 24 min of training) for 4 days each week. The group receiving cutaneous
feedback swam with buoyant tubes suspended from the bottom of the pool, which touched the
skin of their hindpaws and hindlimbs as they swam. The rats in the non-swimming group
remained in the swimming room for the duration of the sessions each day. They were handled
daily and received sweetened cereal as treats with the trained animals at the completion of each
training session.
Behavioral Outcome Measures
The BBB involves placing the animal in an open field (36 inches in diameter) and evaluating
hindlimb function for 4 min. This evaluation was performed weekly by the same two scorers,
who were presented the animals in random order. The low end of the scale (0–7) is characterized
by individual joint movements, whereas the intermediate (8–13) and high (14–21) ends of the
scale are characterized by weight support and coordination and paw position, respectively.
Animals were assessed preoperatively and at approximately weekly intervals thereafter. Scores
were analyzed with repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) and followed by Student
Newman-Keuls post hoc t-tests when appropriate.
The Louisville Swimming Scale (LSS) is an 18-point scale (0–17) with three ranges: 0–5, 6–
11, and 12–17 (Table 1). This assessment was designed to evaluate swimming performance
based on three primary components, forelimb dependency, hindlimb activity and body position.
While the categories shown in Table 1 were developed using the basic structure of the BBB
scale as a rough guide (Basso et al., 1995), a strong emphasis was placed on the different
swimming patterns of both injured and normal rats. When a normal rat swims, it is completely
dependent on its hindlimbs for forward locomotion and the forelimbs are used only
occasionally to steer. The trunk remains at an angle of 20° or less to the water surface and the
hindlimbs kick in an alternating fashion to move the animal through the water. The trunk is
rotationally stable while the animal is moving. In contrast, animals with moderately-severe
spinal cord injuries are completely dependent on their forelimbs for forward locomotion,
display a tail down body angle greater than 45° and/or are rotationally unstable showing 45°
or more of body roll (about the long axis). With the LSS scale, animals that score in the 0–5
category are poor swimmers that rely heavily on their forelimbs for forward locomotion and
have little or no hindlimb movement. Animals that score in the 6–11 range are intermediate
swimmers with occasional to frequent hindlimb movement but with some retained dependency
on their forelimbs for forward motion, occasional to consistent trunk instability and a mild
(21–45°, tail down from horizontal) body angle during forward locomotion (Fig. 1). Animals
that score 12 and higher have consistent hindlimb movement, little to no forelimb dependency,
little to no trunk instability and frequent to consistent alternating hindlimb movement.
Swimming performance was evaluated using the LSS scale prior to injury, at 11 days post-
injury and at approximately weekly intervals thereafter. For each testing session, the animals
swam one 4-min session and were scored by two independent observers and a third person who
videotaped 1 min of each swim session with a Sony MiniDV digital camera. The initial LSS
evaluation, on post-injury day 11 and prior to any training, was done without centrifuge tubes.
Starting on post-injury day 18, rats in the cutaneous feedback group were evaluated with the
centrifuge tubes in the pool and the animals in the standard swimming group and the non-
swimmers were tested without the tubes. The water depth and temperature were kept constant.Smith et al. Page 5
J Neurotrauma . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 March 3.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Early in the study, the videos were used to confirm body angles and trunk instability scores,
by consensus among the scorers. At the completion of the training, on post-injury day 70, all
the animals were assessed using the LSS Scale without cutaneous feedback. For the terminal
assessment (day 70), the animals were presented to the scorers in a random order.
Statistical Analysis
LSS scores were analyzed with repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) and followed
by Student Newman-Keuls post hoc t-tests when appropriate.
To examine the relationship between the BBB and LSS scores, scatterplots were constructed
and the lines of best fit were plotted for the total data set and also for the individual groups.
Pearson correlation coefficients were calculated for each line of best fit with the level of
significance set at 95%.
Histological Outcomes
The rats were euthanized on post-injury day 73 with excess anesthetic (ketamine/xylazine, 80
and 10 mg/kg i.p., respectively) and perfused transcardially with calcium free tyrodes and 4%
paraformaldehyde. The spinal cords were removed and post-fixed in the same fixative
overnight, followed by cryoprotection in 30% sucrose. Spinal cord tissue was cut at 30 μm and
mounted onto glass slides. One set of slides was stained with Cresyl violet as previously
described (Hadi et al., 2000). Every second section was photographed with a digital SPOT
camera (Medical Diagnostics) attached to a Macintosh G4 computer. The sections were then
traced using a Wacom Intuos (Vancouver, WA) drawing tablet with Appleworks 6.0 and saved
as a bit-map file. The bit-map images were opened in NIH image and the areas of white matter,
gray matter, and cavity were calculated for each section (Magnuson et al., 2005). The injury
epicenter was determined as the section with the least spared white matter. The area
measurements were transferred to an Excel spreadsheet and graphed. The spared white matter
at the injury epicenter was calculated as a percent of the white matter area taken from uninjured
animals (Magnuson et al., 2005; Takami et al., 2002).
Results
At 11 days post-injury, and prior to any swim training, all of the animals were highly dependent
on their forelimbs for forward motion and received LSS scores (tested without tubes) in the
poor category (0–5). By post-injury day 18, after the first week of swim training (a single 4-
min training session per day for 4 days), the animals being trained and tested with cutaneous
feedback had an average LSS score of 8.0 ± 3.0 (intermediate) while the swimmers that were
trained and tested without cutaneous feedback and the non-swimmers remained in the poor
category with scores of 4.5 ± 2.8 and 2.3 ± 1.0, respectively (Table 1 and Fig. 2). All of the
animals were at least somewhat dependent on their forelimbs for forward motion and animals
in the cutaneous feedback group had frequent (51–95%) or consistent (96–100%) hindlimb
movement. The animals in the standard swimming and non-swimming groups showed
occasional (6–50%) hindlimb movement, at most (Fig. 2). Likewise, animals in the non-
swimming group had more frequent episodes of moderate to severe trunk instability compared
to the animals receiving swim training. Figure 1 illustrates a typical injured and a normal rat
swimming without cutaneous feedback and the relationship between the buoyant tubes and
hindpaws for an injured rat during swim training.
By post-injury day 40, the mean LSS score for animals in the cutaneous feedback group was
significantly higher than for the other groups (time: F = 43.0, df = 4, 72, p < 0.001; group:
F= 5.8, df = 1, 18, p < 0.01; Fig. 2). Likewise, the group trained and tested without cutaneous
feedback had significantly higher LSS scores than the non-swimmers (group: F = 9.0, df = 1,Smith et al. Page 6
J Neurotrauma . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 March 3.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
18, p < 0.05). The animals receiving cutaneous feedback had frequent or consistent hindlimb
movement and showed little dependency on their forelimbs for forward motion (seldom or
occasional, <50%). Likewise, they had fewer episodes of trunk instability and an improved
body position in the water. The majority of animals in the standard swim group had frequent
hindlimb movement, occasional forelimb dependency and frequent episodes of moderate trunk
instability. The non-swimmers had seldom or no hindlimb use ( ≤5%), consistent forelimb
dependency (>95%) and frequent episodes of moderate to severe trunk instability (>50%). By
the final week of the study, the animals receiving cutaneous feedback during training had an
average LSS score of 11.4 ± 3.3, while the standard swimming and non-swimming groups had
average scores of 7.3 ± 3.2 and 2.6 ± 1.6, respectively. On post-injury day 70, the animals were
re-tested as they were on day 11, without cutaneous feedback. The animals were presented in
random order. Both training groups scored significantly better than the untrained group (Fig.
2), and the group trained with cutaneous feedback scored better than the no-feedback group
(8.9 ± 3.3 and 7.9 ± 3.7, respectively); however, this difference was not statistically significant.
No significant differences in the Open Field BBB scores between the swim groups were found
at any time point tested (time: F = 0.75, df = 6, 126, p > 0.05; group: F = 1.0, df = 1, 21, p >
0.05; Fig. 3). Animals in the cutaneous feedback group had an average terminal BBB score of
10.9 ± 1.3 while the animals trained without cutaneous feedback and the non-swimming group
had average BBB scores of 10.1 ± 1.5 and 9.9 ± 1.5, respectively. Sham animals had an average
terminal BBB score of 20.8 ± 0.5. Table 2 provides brief explanations of various levels of the
BBB scoring system with the scores of 8, 9, and 10 in bold.
In order to better understand the relationship between swimming and walking, the terminal
LSS scores were plotted against the BBB scores. Regression lines of best fit were plotted to
illustrate the relationships. A significant correlation between the LSS and Open Field BBB
scores was present for the group trained with cutaneous feedback (Fig. 4, p < 0.05). The
correlation for the group trained without cutaneous feedback approached significance ( p =
0.054) and the relationship for the non-swimming group was not statistically significant.
Evaluation of the amount of spared white matter at the injury epicenter for animals in each of
the three groups showed no significant differences. Figure 5 provides an example of a
moderately-severe (25 g-cm) contusion injury showing Nissl stained sections taken from the
injury epicenter and 2.0 mm rostral to the epicenter. Table 3 represents the average percent of
spared white matter for each of the three groups.
Discussion
One of the goals of the present study was to extend to rats the work by Muir and Steeves
(1995) , who showed that cutaneous feedback during swimming could positively influence the
recovery of hindlimb function following an incomplete (hemisection) spinal cord injury in
chicks. Therefore, using a rat model of spinal cord injury, we set out to determine (1) if
swimming-based rehabilitation would result in improved recovery of hindlimb function during
walking and/or swimming and (2) if cutaneous feedback during swimming would enhance any
improvement in hindlimb function. The results support our hypotheses, in part, by
demonstrating that a swimming-based rehabilitation strategy involving supplemental
cutaneous feedback can bring about improvements in the recovery of hindlimb function in the
water. However, swimming-based rehabilitation had no effect on hindlimb function during
overground walking.
In the present study, the animals that were trained with cutaneous feedback showed significant
improvement in their LSS scores from 3.1 at post-injury day 11 (tested without cutaneous
feedback) to 11.4 at day 68. Similarly, the group that was trained and tested without cutaneousSmith et al. Page 7
J Neurotrauma . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 March 3.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
feedback showed improvement in swimming, however, their mean terminal LSS at post-injury
day 68 was 7.9, which is significantly lower than the group trained and tested with cutaneous
feedback. These groups of animals had initial, post-injury BBB scores of 3, indicating that they
had movement of two of the three joints, and terminal BBB scores of 10.9 and 10.1,
respectively, indicating that they demonstrated occasional weight-supported stepping that
lacked coordination (Basso et al., 1995). These observations show some similarities to those
reported by Muir and Steeves (1995) who demonstrated in the chick that supplemental
cutaneous feedback during swim training appears to enhance the recovery of function following
an incomplete spinal cord injury. In their study, cutaneous feedback during swim training
substantially enhanced the swimming activity of the leg on the injured side during training, as
assessed using kinematics and angle-angle plots for the knee and ankle (Muir and Steeves,
1995).
The animals that did not receive swim training had initial and terminal mean LSS scores of 2.1
and 3.3, respectively, indicating that they were completely dependent on their forelimbs for
forward motion during swimming throughout the study. These animals had initial and terminal
BBB scores of 2.1 and 9.9, respectively, indicating that they were similar to the groups that
received swim training when walking over-ground. This finding replicates in rats that reported
by Muir and Steeves (1995) for chicks who showed that trained and untrained animals showed
similar levels of hindlimb recovery when walking despite the striking differences when
swimming.
Between post-injury days 11 and 18, animals received only 4 min of training, with or without
cutaneous feedback, per day for 4 days (on post-injury days 14, 15, 16, and 17). For the animals
trained and tested in the presence of cutaneous feedback this resulted in a 4.5-point increase
(3 to 7.5) in their mean LSS score. Animals trained and tested without cutaneous feedback
showed only a 1.5-point increase (3 to 4.5) over the same period. We suggest that some of the
increase seen for animals trained for only 16 min over 4 days with cutaneous feedback may be
due to the direct influence of cutaneous feedback on hindlimb movement in the water.
Swimming is not normally associated with cutaneous feedback such as that supplied by the
centrifuge tubes, and we observed that cutaneous input to the dorsal surface of the foot (during
forward motion supplied by the forelimbs with the hindlimbs dragging) appeared to induce
hindlimb flexion. During forward motion the flexed limb often then made contact with the
tubes on its plantar surface (Fig. 1), which appeared, in turn, to induce an extension of the limb.
On post-injury day 70, a terminal LSS assessment was done without cutaneous feedback for
all three experimental groups. During this assessment the animals were presented in random
order and no pre-training was provided to animals in group 1 to acclimatize them to swimming
without the centrifuge tubes. The LSS scores for groups 2 and 3 remained stable compared to
previous assessments, however the average LSS score for group 1 dropped from 11.4 to 8.9.
This suggests that the lack of cutaneous feedback had an acute negative effect on their
swimming ability, but on average they remained better swimmers than those in group 2 that
were trained and tested without cutaneous feedback.
Thus, in both the chick hemisection and rat thoracic contusion models of spinal cord injury,
significant functional improvement can result from a swimming-based rehabilitation program
involving supplemental cutaneous feedback. However, in the present study we found that
significant improvement in hindlimb function during swimming is training dependent and
appears to be enhanced by supplemental cutanouse feedback, but is not dependent on it. In
contrast, Muir and Steeves (1995) reported that very little improvement in the activity of the
leg on the injured side could be achieved in the absence of cutaneous feedback. This may reflect
the different injuries used and the pattern of spared tissue. The moderately-severe contusion
injuries we used showed approximately 10% white matter sparing at the injury epicenter,Smith et al. Page 8
J Neurotrauma . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 March 3.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
compared to an uninjured spinal cord, and this sparing was largely bilaterally symmetrical.
However, the hemisection injury used by Muir and Steeves (1995) spared 50% of the white
matter at the injury epicenter, on one side of the spinal cord. One could speculate that the small
amount of bilateral sparing following a contusion may be sufficient to reduce the strict
dependency on cutaneous feedback of the circuitry below the injury shown in the chick model.
There are, however, many other issues to consider, including the relatively immature state of
the chick model.
Bouyer and Rossignol (2003) showed recently that cutaneous afferents from the foot are
absolutely necessary for successful re-training of hindlimb walking on the treadmill in
completely spinalized cats. They found that complete hindpaw deafferentation rendered
treadmill retraining impossible, even if non-specific sensory input is provided (tail pinching).
In the contusion model of spinal cord injury the lumbar spinal cord is not completely isolated
from the higher CNS and sensory input from the hindlimbs and paws is intact. Our results
showed that swim training in the absence of any supplementary cutaneous feedback can result
in improved hindlimb function during swimming in parallel with the normal progression of
recovery of over ground walking. This suggests that while cutaneous feedback may be
absolutely necessary for re-training of a stereotypic locomotor activity that is normally
associated with substantial cutaneous input from the paws, it is not necessary for re-training
of swimming, an activity not normally associated with cutaneous input. However, our results
show that supplemental cutaneous input, that may be inappropropriate for the behavior of
swimming, can be used to enhance, at least acutely, hindlimb movements during swimming
thus potentially improving the re-training process.
In the present study, the majority of animals achieved plantar paw placement during stance
with or without weight-support (BBB scores of 9 or 8, respectively) by week 5 regardless of
which training group they were in (Fig. 3). This observation is of interest for two reasons. First
of all, it suggests that moderate swim training, with or without cutaneous feedback, does not
appear to alter the time course of functional recovery of hindlimb movements in the open field.
Secondly, it suggests that the cutaneous and proprioceptive (limb-loading) sensory feedback
associated with plantar paw placement may be a key factor allowing spinal cord injured animals
to achieve substantial improvements in hindlimb function during over-ground locomotion. This
implies that achieving plantar paw placement allows these animals to re-train themselves
resulting in functional improvements up-to and including weight-supported stepping that lacks
consistent forelimb-hindlimb coordination (BBB scores of 10–11). Recent work by Van
Meeteren et al. (2003) and Lankhorst et al. (2001) suggests that increasing hindlimb activity
with plantar paw placement, in the form of voluntary wheel running in an enriched
environment, may be reflected as small but significant improvements in hindlimb function
during over-ground walking. While the mechanisms behind such plastic changes in spinal cord
and neuromuscular function are not know, it has been shown that post-spinal cord injury
allodynia is reduced more effectively by treadmill exercise than it is by swimming ( Hutchinson
et al., 2004), suggesting that lasting changes to sensory input and processing can result from
activity-based rehabilitation strategies that include cutaneous and proprioceptive (limb-
loading) feedback. It has also been shown that activity-based rehabilitation strategies can
induce modest but significant changes in factors and receptors thought to be involved in
plasticity in the spinal cord and elsewhere in the central nervous system (Gomez-Pinilla et al.,
2002).
The corollary to these observations also appears to hold, in that improvements in swimming
performance are dependent on a re-training process, which did not occur in the non-swimmers
and was enhanced in the group trained with cutaneous feedback. We can conclude from these
observations that moderately-intense swim training (24 min per day) with or without cutaneous
feedback, significantly enhances the recovery of functional hindlimb movements duringSmith et al. Page 9
J Neurotrauma . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 March 3.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
swimming without significantly influencing either the time course or end point of the recovery
of functional hindlimb movements in the open field. Swim training with cutaneous feedback
may be even more effective, however our results do not allow us to distinguish a significant
long-term effect of cutaneous feedback from a direct or acute influence of the centrifuge tubes
on hindlimb movement. We will attempt to tease out these differences in a future study by
doing LSS assessments on all experimental animals in the presence and absence of cutaneous
feedback at each time point.
It has been reported by a number of authors in both animal models and human spinal cord
injury (Harkema et al., 1997; De Leon et al., 1998a ,b; Hutchinson et al., 2004 ) that post-injury
training is task-specific. Animals that are trained to stand show improved standing but not
walking, and animals that are trained to walk, but not to stand show improvements that are
specific to walking. We hypothesize that our results demonstrate this phenomenon in two
natural modes of locomotion, walking and swimming. The animals that are exposed to
swimming on a regular basis (with or without cutaneous feedback) show recovery of hindlimb
function that parallels, qualitatively and quantitatively, the normal course of recovery seen for
over-ground walking. Animals not exposed to water show little to no improvement in their
swimming capabilities. In support of these hypotheses, we found that a scatterplot of the
terminal BBB and LSS scores indicates a significant relationship between these two measures
for the group that received swim training with cutaneous feedback (Fig. 4). The standard
swimming group shows a correlation that approaches significance while the non-swimming
group shows a lack of correlation between these scores. Qualitative similarities include
hindlimb alternation during swimming and stepping in the open field. Quantitative similarities
include the amount of hindlimb movement during swimming (none, seldom, occasional,
frequent, consistent) and the amount of stepping in the open field (occasional, frequent,
consistent).
In summary, three critical points can be made from these data. First of all, animals with 25 g-
cm contusion injuries at T9 show substantial recovery of hindlimb function during walking
regardless of the swim training they undergo. We interpret this to indicate that these animals
are re-training themselves to walk and that this re-training process is not influenced by their
swim training or lack thereof. The majority of 25 g-cm injured animals achieve plantar paw
placement while standing by 3–5 weeks post-injury. This means that the spinal cord will be
receiving cutaneous and proprioceptive input appropriate for stance (plantar surface of the paw
and limb-loading), suggesting that re-training of the spinal cord can occur spontaneously while
the animals are moving about in their cages. Secondly, animals that are not trained to swim
following a 25 g-cm contusion injury at T9 do not spontaneously recover significant hindlimb
function during swimming. Finally, animals that are trained to swim following injury recover
significant hindlimb function during swimming and this recovery can be enhanced if the
training includes phasic cutaneous feedback. Overall, our results support the concept of task-
specific training effects following spinal cord injury and provide support to the earlier studies
pointing to the importance of cutaneous feedback during training. Unfortunately, our findings
cannot be used to provide support for the clinical use of a training strategy using un-loaded
limbs because of the likelihood that our animals were experiencing substantial training effects
during their normal daily activities. However, the present study presents a model of retraining
that has the potential to provide substantial insight into the mechanisms of plasticity and
learning in the spinal cord circuitry caudal to an incomplete injury.
Acknowledgments
We wish to acknowledge the very helpful suggestions by J. Bresnahan. Excellent technical assistance was provided
by Christine Nunn, Kim Fentress and Aaron Puckett. This work was supported by a grant from the Kentucky Spinal
Cord and Head Injury Research Trust to D.S.K.M. and by NIH/NCRR P20-RR15576. D.S.K.M. is supported in part
by Norton Healtcare (Louisville, KY).Smith et al. Page 10
J Neurotrauma . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 March 3.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
References
Abel R, Schablowski M, Rupp R, Gerner HJ. Gait analysis on the treadmill-monitoring exercise in the
treatment of paraplegia. Spinal Cord 2002;40:17–22. [PubMed: 11821965]
Barbeau H, Wainberg M, Finch L. Description and application of a system for locomotor rehabilitation.
Med Biol Eng Comput 1987;25:341–344. [PubMed: 3449731]
Basso DM, Beattie MS, Bresnahan JC. A sensitive and reliable locomotor rating scale for open field
testing in rats. J Neurotrauma 1995;12:1–21. [PubMed: 7783230]
Basso DM, Beattie MS, Bresnahan JC. Graded histological and locomotor outcomes after spinal cord
contusion using the NYU weight-drop device versus transection. Exp Neurol 1996;139:244–256.
[PubMed: 8654527]
Bouyer LJ, Rossignol S. Contribution of cutaneous inputs from the hindpaw to the control of locomotion.
II. Spinal cats. J Neurophysiol 2003;90:3640–3653. [PubMed: 12944535]
De Leon RD, Hodgson JA, Roy RR, Edgerton VR. Locomotor capacity attributable to step training versus
spontaneous recovery following spinalization in adult cats. J Neurophysiol 1998a;79:1329–1340.
[PubMed: 9497414]
De Leon RD, Hodgson JA, Roy RR, Edgerton VR. Full weight-bearing hindlimb standing following
standtraining in the adult spinal cat. J Neurophysiol 1998b;80:83–91. [PubMed: 9658030]
Dietz V, Colombo G, Jensen L. Locomotor activity in spinal man. Lancet 1994;344:1260–1263.
[PubMed: 7967986]
Dietz V, Colombo G, Jensen L, Baumgartner L. Locomotor capacity of spinal cord in paraplegic patients.
Ann Neurol 1995;37:574–582. [PubMed: 7755351]
Edgerton VR, Roy RR, Hodgson JA, Prober RJ, DE Guzman CP, De Leon R. Potential of adult
mammalian lumbosacral spinal cord to execute and acquire improved locomotion in the absence of
supraspinal input. J Neurotrauma 1992;9:S119–S128. [PubMed: 1588602]
Gomez-Pinilla F, Ying Z, Roy RR, Molteni R, Edgerton VR. Voluntary exercise induces a BDNF-
mediated mechanism that promotes neuroplasticity. J Neurophysiol 2002;88:2187–2195. [PubMed:
12424260]
Grillner S. Locomotion in vertebrates: central mechanisms and reflex interaction. Physiol Rev
1975;55:247–304. [PubMed: 1144530]
Grillner S, Zangger P. The effect of dorsal root transection on the efferent motor pattern in the cat's
hindlimb during locomotion. Acta Physiol Scand 1984;120:393–405. [PubMed: 6741575]
Grillner S, Zangger P. How detailed is the central generator for locomotion? Brain Res 1975;88:367–
371. [PubMed: 1148835]
Hadi B, Zhang YP, Burke DA, Shields CB, Magnuson DS. Lasting paraplegia caused by loss of lumbar
spinal cord interneurons in rats: no direct correlation with motor neuron loss. J Neurosurg
2000;93:266–275. [PubMed: 11012058]
Hadi B, Zhang YP, Burke DA, Shields CB, Magnuson DS. Lasting paraplegia caused by loss of lumbar
spinal cord interneurons in rats: no direct correlation with motor neuron loss. J Neurosurg
2000;93:266–275. [PubMed: 11012058]
Harkema SJ, Hurley SL, Patel UK, Requejo PS, Dobkin BH, Edgerton VR. Human lumbosacral spinal
cord interprets loading during stepping. J Neurophysiol 1997;77:797–811. [PubMed: 9065851]
Hiebert GW, Pearson KG. Contribution of sensory feedback to the generation of extensor activity during
walking in the decerebrate cat. J Neurophysiol 1999;81:758–770. [PubMed: 10036275]
Hicks AL, Martin KA, Ditor DS, et al. Long-term exercise training in persons with spinal cord injury:
effects on strength, arm ergometry performance and psychological well-being. Spinal Cord
2003;41:34–43. [PubMed: 12494319]
Hutchinson KJ, Gomez-Pinilla F, Crowe MJ, Ying Z, Basso DM. Three exercise paradigms differentially
improve sensory recovery after spinal cord contusion in rats. Brain 2004;127:1403–1414. [PubMed:
15069022]
Jordan LM. Initiation of locomotion in mammals. Ann NY Acad Sci 1998;860:83–93. [PubMed:
9928303]Smith et al. Page 11
J Neurotrauma . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 March 3.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Lankhorst AJ, Ter Laak MP, Van Laar TJ, et al. The effects of enriched housing on functional recovery
after spinal cord contusive injury in the adult rat. J Neurotrauma 2001;18:203–215. [PubMed:
11229712]
Loy DN, Magnuson DS, Zhang YP, et al. Functional redundancy of ventral spinal locomotor pathways.
J Neurosci 2002;22:315–323. [PubMed: 11756515]
Maegele M, Muller S, Wernig A, Edgerton VR, Harkema SJ. Recruitment of spinal motor pools during
voluntary movements versus stepping after human spinal cord injury. J Neurotrauma 2002;19:1217–
1229. [PubMed: 12427330]
Magnuson DS, Trinder TC, Zhang YP, Burke D, Morassutti DJ, Shields CB. Comparing deficits
following excitotoxic and contusion injuries in the thoracic and lumbar spinal cord of the adult rat.
Exp Neurol 1999;156:191–204. [PubMed: 10192790]
Magnuson DS, Lovett MR, Coffee C, et al. Functional consequences of lumbar spinal cord contusion
injuries in the adult rat. J Neurotrauma 2005;22:529–543. [PubMed: 15892599]
Muir GD, Steeves JD. Phasic cutaneous input facilitates locomotor recovery after incomplete spinal injury
in the chick. J Neurophysiol 1995;74:358–368. [PubMed: 7472337]
Multon S, Franzen R, Poirrier AL, Scholtes F, Schoenen J. The effect of treadmill training on motor
recovery after a partial spinal cord compression-injury in the adult rat. J Neurotrauma 2003;20:699–
706. [PubMed: 12965049]
Noga BR, Kriellaars DJ, Jordan LM. The effect of selective brainstem or spinal cord lesions on treadmill
locomotion evoked by stimulation of the mesencephalic or pontomedullary locomotor regions. J
Neurosci 1991;11:1691–1700. [PubMed: 2045881]
Pearson KG. Common principles of motor control in vertebrates and invertebrates. Annu Rev Neurosci
1993;16:265–297. [PubMed: 8460894]
Pepin A, Norman KE, Barbeau H. Treadmill walking in incomplete spinal-cord-injured subjects: 1.
Adaptation to changes in speed. Spinal Cord 2003;41:257–270. [PubMed: 12714988]
Schucht P, Raineteau O, Schwab ME, Fouad K. Anatomical correlates of locomotor recovery following
dorsal and ventral lesions of the rat spinal cord. Exp Neurol 2002;176:143–153. [PubMed: 12093091]
Shefchyk S, Mccrea D, Kriellaars D, Fortier P, Jordan L. Activity of interneurons within the L4 spinal
segment of the cat during brainstem-evoked fictive locomotion. Exp Brain Res 1990;80:290–295.
[PubMed: 2358044]
Shik ML, Severin FV, Orlovskii GN. Control of walking and running by means of electric stimulation
of the midbrain. Biofizika 1966;11:659–666. [PubMed: 6000625]
Van Meeteren NL, Eggers R, Lankhorst AJ, Gispen WH, Hamers FP. Locomotor recovery after spinal
cord contusion injury in rats is improved by spontaneous exercise. J Neurotrauma 2003;20:1029–
1037. [PubMed: 14588119]Smith et al. Page 12
J Neurotrauma . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 March 3.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
FIG. 1.
Shown are pictures illustrating both normal and injured rats swimming without cutaneous
feedback. The panel on the right demonstrates an injured animal swimming with cutaneous
feedback. Note the differences in the body angle and the position of the forelimbs between the
injured and normal rats. The picture on the right illustrates the relationship between the
hindlimbs and the buoyant tubes used to provide cutaneous feedback.Smith et al. Page 13
J Neurotrauma . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 March 3.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
FIG. 2.
Shown are the Louisville Swimming Scale (LSS) scores from 25g-cm injured animals over a
68-day period. One group received daily swim training with cutaneous feedback, one group
was trained without cutaneous feedback, and one group remained untrained. As assessed by
the LSS, the animals trained with cutaneous feedback (1) had significantly higher swim scores
compared to the animals trained without feedback at post-injury days 40 and 68, and compared
to the untrained animals at days 24, 40, 54, and 68 ( p < 0.05). The animals in the group that
was trained without cutaneous feedback (2) had significantly higher swim scores than the
untrained animals (3) at post-injury days 40 and 68. The group of sham animals had
significantly higher swim scores than the injured groups at all time points tested.Smith et al. Page 14
J Neurotrauma . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 March 3.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
FIG. 3.
Shown are the Basso, Beattie, and Bresnahan (BBB) Open-Field Locomotor scores for animals
in each of the four experimental groups. The sham animals had significantly higher BBB scores
compared to animals in the three injured groups at all testing points. There were no significant
differences between any of the injured groups.Smith et al. Page 15
J Neurotrauma . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 March 3.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
FIG. 4.
Shown is a scatter plot of the terminal (week 9) Basso, Beattie, and Bresnahan (BBB) and
Louisville Swimming Scale (LSS) scores for all animals. Pearson correlations and lines of best
fit were calculated for each group. The group trained with cutaneous feedback showed a
significant positive correlation between the LSS and the BBB scores ( p < 0.05).Smith et al. Page 16
J Neurotrauma . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 March 3.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
FIG. 5.
Shown are photomicrographs (4×) of Nissl (Cresyl violet)–stained sections from a 25 g-cm
injured spinal cord 2.0 mm rostral to the epicenter ( A) and at the T9 injury epicenter ( B). Adobe
Photoshop™ was used to adjust the brightness and contrast, remove the background, and
transfer the photomicrographs to gray scale.Smith et al. Page 17
J Neurotrauma . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 March 3.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author ManuscriptSmith et al. Page 18
Table 1
Louisville Swim Scale: Summary
Category Range Description
HL movement 0N Any hindlimb movements are counted
4C
HL alternation 0N/S Strict R/L alternation over two complete cycles
3C
FL dependency 0C FL movements are associated with forward motion; steering movements are
not counted4N
Trunk instability 0F/S Rotation about the long axis of the body
4N or S (Mi)
Body angle 0Se Tail down angle relative to water surface
2N/Mi
Each range goes from none (0%; N), through occasional (1–5%; O), to frequent (51–95%; F) and consistent (96–100%; C). Trunk instability and body
angle includes none (0°; N), mild (1–20°; Mi), moderate (21–45°; Mo), and severe (46° and up; Se). Poor swimmers score, 0–5; intermediate swimmers,
score 6–11; good swimmers, score 12–17. Normal Sprague-Dawley rats score a perfect 17.
J Neurotrauma . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 March 3.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author ManuscriptSmith et al. Page 19
Table 2
Functional Characteristics of the Basso, Beattie, and Bresnahan Scale
Score Indication
0 Complete plegia of the limb
7 Extensive movement of all three joints without weight support
8 Plantar paw placement without weight support
9 Plantar paw placement with weight support during stance only
10 Occasional weight support during stepping, no coordination
13 Consistent weight support with some coordinated stepping
14 Consistent coordinated stepping with plantar weight support, incorrect foot placement, posture and tail
position
21 Normal locomotion
Shown are some of the key features of the BBB Open Field Locomotor Scale that are of particular importance for the current study. The range of
scores received by animals in the current study is shown in boldface.
J Neurotrauma . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 March 3.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author ManuscriptSmith et al. Page 20
Table 3
Histological Measures: Injury Epicenter
Group Spared white matter
Cutaneous feedback 8.6 ± 5.3
No feedback 11.0 ± 1.5
Non-swimmer 8.8 ± 6.4
Data presented as percentage of normal (uninjured controls) ± SD. No significant differences were found between any of the swim groups.
J Neurotrauma . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 March 3.
