A Cross Sectional Study Examining Shoulder Pain and Disability
in Division I Female Swimmers
Shana Harrington, PT, PhD, SCS, MTC ,
Assistant Professor, Department of Clinical & Applied Movement Sciences, University of North
Florida, 1 UNF Drive, Jacksonville, FL 32224, Office : 904-620-1431, Fax: 904-620-2848
Corinne Meisel, DPT , and
Sports Physical Therapy Resident, DiSepio Institute for Rural Health and Wellness, Saint Francis
University, P.O. Box 600, Loretto, PA 15940, Office: 814-472-3936, Fax: 814-472-3905
Angela Tate, PT, PhD
Associate Faculty – Arcadia University, Clinic Director – Willow Grove Physical Therapy, 1001
Easton Rd, 101 Manor, Willow Grove, PA 19090, Office: 215-659-7759, Fax: 215-659-6658
Shana Harrington: s.harrington@unf.edu; Corinne Meisel: corinnemeisel@hotmail.com; Angela Tate: tatea@arcadia.edu
Abstract
Introduction— The prevalence of shoulder pain in the competitive swimming population has
been reported as high as 91%. Female collegiate swimmers have a reported shoulder injury rate 3×
greater than their male counterparts. There has been little information on how to best prevent
shoulder pain in this population. The purpose of this study is to examine if differences exist in
shoulder range of motion, upper extremity strength, core endurance, and pectoralis minor length in
NCAA Division I female swimmers with and without shoulder pain and disability.
Methods— NCAA Division I females (n=37) currently swimming completed a brief survey that
included the pain subscale of the Penn Shoulder Score (PSS) and the Sports/Performing Arts
Module of the Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand (DASH) Outcome Measure. Passive
range of motion for shoulder internal rotation (IR) and external rotation (ER) at 90° abduction was
measured using a digital inclinometer. Strength was measured using a hand held dynamometer for
scapular depression and adduction, scapular adduction, IR, and ER. Core endurance was assessed
using the side bridge and prone bridge tests. Pectoralis minor muscle length was assessed in both a
resting and stretched position using the PALM palpation meter. All measures were taken on the
dominant and nondominant arms.
Results— Participants were classified as positive for pain and disability if the following 2 criteria
were met: 1) the DASH sports module score was greater than 6/20 points and 2) the PSS strenuous
pain score was ≥4/10. If these criteria were not met, participants were classified as negative for
pain and disability. Significant differences were found between the two groups on the dominant
side for pectoralis muscle length at rest (p=0.003) and stretch (p=0.029).
Correspondence to: Shana Harrington, s.harrington@unf.edu .
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
J Sport Rehabil . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 August 27.
Published in final edited form as:
J Sport Rehabil . 2014 February ; 23(1): 65–75. doi:10.1123/jsr.2012-0123.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Conclusions— The results provide preliminary evidence regarding an association between a
decrease in pectoralis minor length and shoulder pain and disability in Division I female
swimmers.
Keywords
Swimming; shoulder pain; female
The prevalence of shoulder pain in the competitive swimming population has been reported
as high as 91%.1 One study found that 69% of National Collegiate Athletic Association
(NCAA) Division I Swimmers experienced shoulder pain.2 This shoulder pain can be so
severe that it may lead to functional impairments and even cessation of swimming
participation.3 The reported injury rate in collegiate swimmers ranges from 2.12 – 3.78 per
1,000 per athlete exposure and 35–44% of those injuries were to the shoulder/ upper arm.4,5
This indicates swimming has an overall lower risk of injury compared to other sports, but a
high risk for shoulder injury. In addition, one study found that competitive swimmers with a
history of shoulder pain were 4.1 times more likely to have a future shoulder injury.6
Females are of particular interest when it comes to examining shoulder pain and disability in
overhead competitive sports for three main reasons. First, in a study conducted by Sallis and
colleagues, collegiate female swimmers were found to have a significant increase in reported
shoulder injuries when compared to males (21.05 per 100 swimmers compared to 6.55).7
Second, research has found that females demonstrate more generalized glenohumeral joint
hypermobility than men.4,8 Hypermobility has been described as a potential risk factor for
injuries during sporting activities.9,10 Finally, participation in female collegiate swimming
has doubled over the last 20 years, indicating a steady rise in popularity.11 Currently, there
are over 500 collegiate female swim teams in the United States (U.S.) and swimming ranks
seventh overall in female sport participation.11
Unfortunately, even with the high shoulder injury rate in competitive swimming, a clear
understanding of how to prevent and treat shoulder pain in collegiate female swimmers is
lacking. Several studies have investigated risk factors for shoulder pain in
swimmers2,3,6,12–15 two of which limited their investigation to the collegiate population.2,14
Since subacromial impingement is the most common underlying condition responsible for
swimmer’s should pain and injury, various physical characteristics that are associated with
subacromial impingement have been compared between swimmers with and without
shoulder pain and injury. These factors include: scapular kinematics, internal and external
rotation strength, ER/IR strength ratio, joint laxity, yardage, flexibility, shoulder range of
motion, and types of training.2,3,6,12–16 However, the results from the previous studies have
been inconsistent. Beach and colleagues found no significant correlations between shoulder
flexibility, strength ratios, and shoulder pain in 28 NCAA Division I swimmers and four
club swimmers.2 Based on data collected in a survey, Stocker and colleagues concluded that
collegiate and master’s swimmers did not subjectively report an association between
shoulder pain and shoulder flexibility.14 The authors went on to postulate that pain was
perceived to increase with swim training intensity with a possible relationship between
muscle fatigue and shoulder pain.14 It is important to note that these studies were conductedHarrington et al. Page 2
J Sport Rehabil . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 August 27.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
over 18 years ago and both on land and in water collegiate swim training has changed
drastically during this time. Additionally, the results of these studies should be interpreted
cautiously due to methodological variability.
Due to these limitations and gaps in the research, the investigators sought to explore
relationships between different physical measures and shoulder pain. Bak recently discussed
the etiology of swimmer’s shoulder related to intrinsic and extrinsic factors.16 Intrinsic
factors included: joint hypermobility, scapular dyskinesis, glenohumeral internal rotation
deficit, rotator cuff imbalance, lack of flexibility/ stiffness, posture, core stability, and
increased thoracic kyphosis.16 A recent study conducted by Tate and colleagues examined
several of these risk factors associated with shoulder pain and disability across the lifespan
of female competitive swimmers and found potentially modifiable variables that could be
used as a basis to test the effectiveness of a shoulder injury prevention program in the age
groups studied. However, collegiate swimmers were not included in the study and despite
the high incidence of shoulder pain in female collegiate swimmers, there is a lack of recent
research on factors associated with shoulder pain and disability in female Division I
swimmers.3.
Due to the high rate of shoulder pain and disability in this cohort, it is important to discern
the clinical impairments that exist in collegiate swimmers with pain and disability in order to
assist with creating injury prevention and rehabilitation programs. Therefore, the purpose of
this study is to examine if differences exist in shoulder Range of motion (ROM), upper
extremity strength, core endurance, and pectoralis minor length in NCAA Division I female
swimmers with and without shoulder pain and disability. Based on the findings of Tate et al
and Bak, we hypothesize that female collegiate swimmers who report significant shoulder
pain and disability will demonstrate increased shoulder ROM, decreased upper extremity
strength, decreased core endurance and decreased pectoralis minor length when compared to
those swimmers who do not report significant shoulder pain and disability.
METHODS
Design
A cross-sectional design was used.
Participants
The participants consisted of females from 2 NCAA Division I swim programs (n=37,
age=19.5±1.19) who were at least 18 years old, currently participating in full team practices,
and had no history of shoulder surgery in the past 12 months. Recruitment occurred through
emails sent to NCAA Division I swim coaches who would be conducting winter training in
the state of XXX. See Table 1 for demographics.
Procedures
Participants reported for a single testing session lasting 40 minutes located at a designated
area near the swimming pool. All participants read and signed an informed consent form
approved by the XXX Institutional Review Board. Participants completed a brief surveyHarrington et al. Page 3
J Sport Rehabil . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 August 27.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
titled “Sports and Symptom Survey Form” used by Tate et al to capture basic demographic
information about the swimmer, sport participation, and pain or shoulder symptoms.3
(Appendix A). This survey included a subscale of the Penn Shoulder Score.17 Pain was rated
at rest, with normal activities (eating, dressing, bathing), and with strenuous activities
(sports, reaching, lifting) on a numeric rating scale of 0 (no pain) to 10 (worst possible pain).
Shoulder function during swimming was assessed using the Sports/Performing Arts Module
of the Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand Outcome Measure (DASH).18 The
DASH sports module asks participants to rate 4 items (physical ability with sports
technique, participation, satisfaction, and frequency) using a 5-point scale, with 1 signifying
no difficulty and 5 signifying unable over the past week. Next, shoulder passive shoulder
ROM, shoulder strength, core endurance, and pectoralis minor muscle length was measured
by the same licensed physical therapist.
Bilateral shoulder passive ROM was measured in degrees using a digital inclinometer (The
Saunders Group, Inc., Chaska, MN) in the following order: supine external rotation (ER) at
90° of abduction and supine internal rotation (IR) at 90° of abduction per Norkin.19 Two
trials of passive ROM were performed and the average was used for data analysis. Intra-
tester reliability was previously established for passive ROM (ICC 3,1 0.92 & 1.0, SEM =
0.67 & 1.54 degrees).
Bilateral shoulder peak muscle force in kilograms was measured by means of a maximal
voluntary isometric contraction (MVIC) using a hand held dynamometer (Lafayette
Instrument®, Lafayette, IN) and was normalized to each participant’s body mass. Strength
was assessed using methods described by Daniels and Worthingham for bilateral shoulder
IR, shoulder ER, scapular depression and adduction and scapular adduction in a randomized
order to minimize the effects of fatigue.20 Thirty seconds rest occurred between each trial
and a 1 minute rest period occurred between each testing position. Each measurement was
taken twice and the average was used for data analysis. Intra-tester reliability was previously
established during pilot testing for all shoulder girdle strength measures (ICC 3,1=0.72–0.99,
SEM=0.80–1.35% MVIC).
Core endurance was assessed with the side bridge test21 (Figure 1) and the prone bridge
test22 (Figure 2) used previously by Tate and colleagues.3 Participants were asked to hold
each test for as long as they could and duration was recorded in seconds. In order to assure
proper technique for the core endurance tests, a 12 inch ruler was held by the tester
vertically from the mat to the lowest portion of the hip. If the hip lowered, the participant
was provided verbal instructions to try and resume the correct straight position. If the hip
dropped a second time, the test was ended. Participants performed 1 trial of each core
endurance position in a randomized order: prone, dominant side, nondominant side.
Reliability of core stability related measures has been previously reported (ICC 2,1=0.74 &
0.96, SEM=8.32 & 10.29 seconds).23
Bilateral pectoralis minor muscle length was assessed in both a resting and stretched
position using the PALM palpation meter (Performance Attainment Associates, St. Paul,
MN). Pectoralis minor length was obtained by placing the PALM’s caliper tips on the
medial coracoid process and the 4th intercostals space adjacent to the sternum.24 TestingHarrington et al. Page 4
J Sport Rehabil . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 August 27.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
positions of rest (Figure 3) and stretch (Figure 4) were selected based on previously reported
methodology.3 Normalized pectoralis minor length at rest and stretch was obtained by
dividing the pectoral length by the participant’s height and multiplying by 100. This
normalization has been previously used by Borstad et al. and termed pectoralis minor
index.25 Reliability and validity of the PALM to measure pectoralis minor length have been
previously established (ICC 3,1=0.98 & 0.99, SEM=0.32 & 0.29 cm).24
Statistical Analysis
Participants were divided into groups based the Penn Shoulder Score strenuous numeric
rating score and a total score for swimming disability using the DASH sports module (range,
4–20, with 4 indicating no swimming disability).3 Participants were classified as positive for
pain and disability (+) if the following 2 criteria were met: 1) the DASH sports module score
was greater than 6/20 points and 2) the Penn Shoulder Score strenuous numeric rating score
was ≥4/10. Additionally, our groups were further categorized by whether the combination of
pain and disability occurred on the dominant or nondominant arm. If these criteria were not
met, participants were classified as negative. The cutoff markers were created in order to
compare those with no or minimal shoulder pain and disability with those incurring
substantial shoulder pain and disability. We utilized the same cutoff as Tate and colleagues
for the DASH Sports module , as a score of 6 or more requires at least mild difficulty in 3 of
the 4 areas surveyed.3 However, we used a different cutoff for pain because the swimmers in
our study had higher levels of pain during strenuous activity (swimming).3 Additionally, of
the 37 participants in our study, only 8 participants (21%) reported no pain (0/10) on either
their dominant or nondominant shoulder with strenuous activity, whereas in Tate’s cohort a
greater percentage of swimmers had no reported pain (0/10) on the dominant (39%) or
nondominant (47%) shoulder.3 For the other 29 participants in our study, the responses for
pain with strenuous activity varied from 1/10 to 9/10. Due to the low number of swimmers
reporting 0/10 pain with strenuous activity and the high prevalence of pain in competitive
swimmers, a cut-off needed to be created that emphasized a clear distinction between those
with and without significant shoulder pain and disability. The Penn Shoulder Score
strenuous numeric rating score has been shown to have a standard error of measurement
(SEM) of 1.0 and a minimal detectable change (MDC) of 1.4.26 Therefore, a score of ≥4/10
on the Penn Shoulder Score for pain with strenuous activity was selected to represent
significant pain as it is well above the standard error of measurement, but includes 70% of
the response options (4/10 – 10/10). The following 2 comparisons were made: 1) + or − for
pain and disability on the dominant arm and 2) + or − for pain and disability on the
nondominant arm. Means and standard deviations were calculated per group for all variables
of ROM, shoulder strength, core endurance, and pectoralis minor length.
Based on previous literature and variables the authors were most interested in (pectoralis
minor length and IR ROM), it was estimated that 9–16 participants (Effect Size = 0.71 and
0.94) (positive for pain and disability and negative for pain and disability) were required in
each group for this study to obtain a power of 0.80.3 A one-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA) was conducted to determine if differences existed between the groups on the
dominant extremity (+ for pain and disability or − for pain and disability) on each of the
dependent variables of ROM, shoulder strength, core endurance, and pectoralis minorHarrington et al. Page 5
J Sport Rehabil . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 August 27.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
length. The same analysis was conducted on each dependent variable between the groups on
the nondominant extremity (+ for pain and disability or − for pain and disability). SPSS®
statistical software (version 19.0, SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL) was used to analyze all data.
Statistical significance levels for all comparisons was set a priori of alpha = 0.05.
RESULTS
A total of 37 Division 1 female swimmers participated in this study. The number of
participants grouped as + was 12 for dominant arm and 14 for nondominant arm, 8 of which
were + on both the dominant and nondominant arms. Participant demographics can be seen
in Table 2. The ANOVA revealed a statistically significant difference between groups (+ or
−) on the dominant arm for pectoralis minor length at rest (F 1,35 = 10.265, p = 0.003) and
stretch (F 1,35 = 5.164, p = 0.029) with significantly decreased muscle length at both rest and
stretch for those + participants as shown in Table 3. No other statistically significant
measures were found for the other dependent variables on either the dominant or
nondominant arms. (Table 4)
DISCUSSION
This purpose of this study was to determine if differences exist in shoulder ROM, upper
extremity strength, core endurance, and pectoralis minor length in Division 1 female
swimmers with and without shoulder pain and disability. Our results were in partial
agreement with our hypotheses and indicate that NCAA Division I female swimmers who
reported shoulder pain and disability demonstrated decreased resting and stretched pectoralis
minor length on their dominant arm when compared to those female swimmers who did not
report significant shoulder pain and disability on their dominant arm. However, our results
did not indicate a difference between strength or ROM between the two groups. This is in
agreement with a study conducted by Beach and colleagues who also did not find a
correlation between pain and shoulder ROM or strength in NCAA Division I swimmers.2 It
is important to note that all participants were currently competing at the NCAA Division I
level during data collection, which on average required 18.8 hours of swimming each week.
It is possible that individuals with impaired strength and ROM are not be able to tolerate the
intense demands of such rigorous practice and hence do not compete at this elite level, but
prospective studies would be needed to determine this.
Shortened pectoralis minor length has been associated with altered scapular kinematics. A
change in scapular resting position has been hypothesized to decrease subacromial space due
to increased anterior tilt and internal rotation of the scapula.25 Most studies have not
examined muscle length as a factor which can contribute to shoulder pain, but instead
focused on overall shoulder ROM. Our observations were in partial agreement with the
study conducted by Tate et al, which demonstrated that resting length of the pectoralis minor
was significantly reduced in thigh school swimmers who had pain and disability. Although
the Tate et al study did not include a cohort of female Division I athletes.3
While we are not aware of a reported clinical meaningful difference using the PALM to
measure pectoralis minor length, the significant differences found in the present study on theHarrington et al. Page 6
J Sport Rehabil . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 August 27.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
dominant arm (0.68cm for stretch and 0.53cm for rest) are greater than the reported
measurement error of 0.32cm.24 Our findings of significant differences in pectoralis muscle
length at rest and stretch on the dominant arm indicates that muscle length may play a key
role in contributing to shoulder pain and disability in Division 1 female swimmers.25
Borstad et al. reported that individuals with shortened pectoralis minor length are at a greater
risk for shoulder impingement with increased exposure to elevation, force, and repetition.25
Collegiate swimmers are exposed to each of these factors repeatedly throughout each
practice and competition. Since competitive swimmers are unable to alter their exposure to
shoulder elevation, force, and repetition, increasing pectoralis minor length may be an
important modifiable variable that could potentially increase the subacromial space and
possibly decrease risk of shoulder pain in swimmers. To date, there is limited research on
pectoralis minor stretching interventions in swimmers with shoulder pain and disability
using a valid and reliable clinical tool.
The term “Swimmer’s shoulder” was first coined by Neer and Welsh in 1977 to describe
secondary shoulder impingement in swimmers who breathe to one side.27 Secondary
impingement is used to describe shoulder pain resulting from overuse and is typically
reversible. Allegruci and colleagues further defined secondary impingement in swimmers as
resulting from either “disruption of static stabilizers…or fatigue and weakness of the
dynamic stabilizers”.28 Unfortunately, this definition does not consider the impingement
occurring from tightening or shortening of dynamic stabilizers. This agonist-antagonist
muscle imbalance between tight pectoral muscles and elongated weak scapular muscles has
been addressed in several swimming intervention studies aimed to reduce the postural
abnormalities found in swimmers.29–31 Although these studies incorporated stretching of the
pectorals and scapular strengthening, none of these studies measured pectoralis minor
muscle length directly with a validated technique or used an entirely female subject pool so
direct comparisons to our study is not possible.
While these studies incorporated pectoral stretching in an intervention program designed to
alter posture and scapular kinematics in elite swimmers, the results have been varied.29–31
Hibberd et al found no significant scapular kinematic differences amongst the intervention
and control groups. Although neither the Kluemper nor Lynch studies assessed pectoral
length using the same method as in our study, both reported favorable improvements in
forward shoulder translation and shoulder posture after the interventions. The latter study
also reported that 79% of their intervention group had improvement in shoulder pain after
the intervention program.31 Results also showed a decrease in forward shoulder translation
without differences in scapular muscle strength.31 Forward shoulder translation, a
component of posture, is believed to be caused by a muscular imbalance between a
lengthened middle trapezius and a shortened pectoralis minor.31 Therefore it could be
inferred that the improvement in posture found in the Lynch et al study may be related to
lengthened pectoral musculature. While a cause and effect relationship cannot be determined
from their data, reduced pain ratings were also found with a pectoral stretching program.
Prospective studies using direct pectoral measures may allow better understanding of the
mechanism(s) responsible for the reduction in shoulder pain.Harrington et al. Page 7
J Sport Rehabil . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 August 27.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
A recent study by Williams and colleagues is the first competitive swimming study to our
knowledge that considers both scapular kinematics, which has been considered an indirect
muscle length measurement, and direct muscle length measurement.32 Participants were
divided into either a control group, intervention group one which received a focused
pectoralis minor stretch, or intervention group two which received a gross pectoral stretch.32
There were no significant changes in scapular kinematics, but significant gains in pectoral
length were found in the group who performed the gross pectoral stretch.32 Based on these
findings, it may be inferred that changes in pectoralis minor muscle length may not be
detected when evaluating scapular kinematics, but can be distinguished with direct
measurements of the muscle length indicating that these two methods of measurement are
not equivalent. Nevertheless, more research is needed to determine the most effective
method of increasing pectoralis minor muscle length and its effect on decreasing shoulder
pain in competitive female swimmers.
This present study found no significant differences between upper extremity strength, core
endurance, and shoulder ROM on both the dominant and nondominant arms. We found no
significant difference on the nondominant arm for resting or stretched pectoralis minor
muscle length. These non-significant differences could be due to the limitations within this
study that include a small sample size and utilizing only two Division 1 swim teams. It is
possible that some swimmers underreported their pain and were not included in the
appropriate group. As Hibberd and colleagues state “Swimmers have been taught that
shoulder pain is normal in the sport, and shoulder pain is often unreported until it is
debilitating”.29 We cannot exclude the fact that other factors that were not measured in this
study such as joint laxity and stroke technique may contribute to shoulder pain and disability
in this population. It is important to highlight that there was no preferred breathing pattern in
any group and it remains unclear why those with pain and disability on the nondominant arm
did not demonstrate a significant decrease in pectoralis minor length. Since this was a cross-
sectional study, cause and effect is unable to be determined. Therefore, it is not known if a
shortened pectoralis minor influenced shoulder pain and disability or whether pectoralis
tightness emerged as a result of the shoulder pain and disability. In order to determine this
relationship, future research should utilize a prospective, longitudinal design. Additional
recommendations include: a larger sample size, a blinded the researcher, and a repeated
pectoralis minor measure (pre and post pectoral stretching) using a valid, reliable, and
standardized clinical tool, such as the PALM. This would assist with making more definitive
conclusions regarding the effect of pectoral muscle length on shoulder pain in competitive
swimmers.
CONCLUSION
This study found that there is a significant difference in dominant arm resting and stretched
pectoralis minor muscle length between NCAA Division I female swimmers with and
without shoulder pain and disability. This is the first known study to utilize a validated
clinical tool to measure pectoralis minor length directly in female Division 1 swimmers with
shoulder pain and disability. To better evaluate female swimmers with shoulder pain or
prospectively screen these competitive athletes, rehabilitation professionals should use a
direct measurement of the pectoralis minor muscle length using a valid and reliable tool,Harrington et al. Page 8
J Sport Rehabil . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 August 27.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
such as the PALM palpation meter. Further research is needed to explore possible
interventions to lengthen the pectoralis minor muscle.
References
1. Sein ML, Walton J, Linklater J, et al. Shoulder pain in elite swimmers: primarily due to swim-
volume-induced supraspinatus tendinopathy. British journal of sports medicine. 2010; 44(2):105–
113. [PubMed: 18463295]
2. Beach M, Whitney S, Dickoff-Hoffman S. Relationship of shoulder flexibility, strength, and
endurance to shoulder pain in competitive swimmers. Journal of Orthopaedic and Sports Physical
Therapy. 1992; 16:262–262. [PubMed: 18796745]
3. Tate A, Turner GN, Knab SE, Jorgensen C, Strittmatter A, Michener LA. Risk Factors Associated
With Shoulder Pain and Disability Across the Lifespan of Competitive Swimmers. Journal of
Athletic Training. 2012; 47(2):149–158. [PubMed: 22488280]
4. McFarland EG, Wasik M. Injuries in female collegiate swimmers due to swimming and cross
training. Clinical journal of sport medicine: official journal of the Canadian Academy of Sport
Medicine. 1996; 6(3):178. [PubMed: 8792049]
5. Wolf BR, Ebinger AE, Lawler MP, Britton CL. Injury patterns in Division I collegiate swimming.
The American Journal of Sports Medicine. 2009; 37(10):2037–2042. [PubMed: 19633232]
6. Walker H, Gabbe B, Wajswelner H, Blanch P, Bennell K. Shoulder pain in swimmers: A 12-month
prospective cohort study of incidence and risk factors. Physical Therapy in Sport. 2012
7. Sallis R, Jones K, Sunshine S, Smith G, Simon L. Comparing sports injuries in men and women.
International journal of sports medicine. 2001; 22(06):420–423. [PubMed: 11531034]
8. Borsa PA, Sauers EL, Herling DE. Patterns of glenohumeral joint laxity and stiffness in healthy men
and women. Medicine and science in sports and exercise. 2000; 32(10):1685. [PubMed: 11039638]
9. Kocher MS, Waters PM, Micheli LJ. Upper extremity injuries in the paediatric athlete. Sports
Medicine. 2000; 30(2):117–135. [PubMed: 10966151]
10. Warner JJP, Micheli LJ, Arslanian LE, Kennedy J, Kennedy R. Patterns of flexibility, laxity, and
strength in normal shoulders and shoulders with instability and impingement. The American
Journal of Sports Medicine. 1990; 18(4):366–375. [PubMed: 2403184]
11. National Collegiate Athletic Association. NCAA sports sponsorship and participation rates report
1981–82–2011–12. Indianapolis: Author; 2012.
12. Bak K, Magnusson SP. Shoulder strength and range of motion in symptomatic and pain-free elite
swimmers. The American Journal of Sports Medicine. 1997; 25(4):454–459. [PubMed: 9240978]
13. McMaster WC, Troup J. A survey of interfering shoulder pain in United States competitive
swimmers. The American Journal of Sports Medicine. 1993; 21(1):67–70. [PubMed: 8427371]
14. Stocker D, Pink M, Jobe FW. Comparison of shoulder injury in collegiate-and master’s-level
swimmers. Clinical Journal of Sport Medicine. 1995; 5(1):4–8. [PubMed: 7614080]
15. Su K, Johnson MP, Gracely EJ, Karduna AR. Scapular rotation in swimmers with and without
impingement syndrome: practice effects. MEDICINE AND SCIENCE IN SPORTS AND
EXERCISE. 2004; 36(7):1117–1123. [PubMed: 15235314]
16. Bak K. The Practical Management of Swimmer’s Painful Shoulder: Etiology, Diagnosis, and
Treatment. Clinical Journal of Sport Medicine. 2010; 20(5):386–390. [PubMed: 20818199]
17. Leggin BG, Michener LA, Shaffer MA, Brenneman SK, Iannotti JP, Williams GR Jr. The Penn
shoulder score: reliability and validity. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther Mar. 2006; 36(3):138–151.
18. Hudak PL, Amadio PC, Bombardier C. Development of an upper extremity outcome measure: the
DASH (disabilities of the arm, shoulder and hand) [corrected]. The Upper Extremity Collaborative
Group (UECG). Am J Ind Med Jun. 1996; 29(6):602–608.
19. Norkin, W. Measurement Of Joint Motion: A Guide To Goniometry (MEASUREMENT OF
JOINT MOTION: A GDE TO GONIOMETRY) Autho. 2009.
20. Daniels, L.; Worthingham, C.; Hislop, HJ.; Montgomery, J. Daniels and Worthingham’s Muscle
Testing: Techniques of Manual Examination. WB Saunders; 2007.Harrington et al. Page 9
J Sport Rehabil . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 August 27.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
21. McGill SM, Childs A, Liebenson C. Endurance times for low back stabilization exercises: clinical
targets for testing and training from a normal database. Archives of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation. 1999; 80(8):941–944. [PubMed: 10453772]
22. Schellenberg KL, Lang JM, Chan KM, Burnham RS. A clinical tool for office assessment of
lumbar spine stabilization endurance: prone and supine bridge maneuvers. American journal of
physical medicine & rehabilitation. 2007; 86(5):380–386. [PubMed: 17303961]
23. Waldhelm A, Li L. Endurance tests are the most reliable core stability related measurements.
Journal of Sport and Health Science. 2012
24. Rondeau MW, Padua DA, Thigpen CA, Harrington SE. Precision and Validity of a Clinical
Method for Pectoral Minor Length Assessment in Overhead-Throwing Athletes. Athletic Training
& Sports Health Care. 2012; 4(2):67–72.
25. Borstad JD, Ludewig PM. The effect of long versus short pectoralis minor resting length on
scapular kinematics in healthy individuals. The Journal of orthopaedic and sports physical therapy.
2005; 35(4):227. [PubMed: 15901124]
26. Leggin BG, Michener LA, Shaffer MA, Brenneman SK, Iannotti J, Williams G Jr. The Penn
shoulder score: reliability and validity. The Journal of orthopaedic and sports physical therapy.
2006; 36(3):138. [PubMed: 16596890]
27. Neer C 2nd, Welsh R. The shoulder in sports. The Orthopedic clinics of North America. 1977;
8(3):583. [PubMed: 329174]
28. Allegrucci M, Whitney S, Irrgang J. Clinical implications of secondary impingement of the
shoulder in freestyle swimmers. The Journal of orthopaedic and sports physical therapy. 1994;
20(6):307. [PubMed: 7849751]
29. Hibberd EE, Oyama S, Spang JT, Prentice W, Myers JB. Effect of a 6-Week Strengthening
Program on Shoulder and Scapular-Stabilizer Strength and Scapular Kinematics in Division I
Collegiate Swimmers. Journal of sport rehabilitation. 2012; 21(3):253. [PubMed: 22387875]
30. Kluemper M, Uhl T, Hazelrigg H. Effect of stretching and strengthening shoulder muscles on
forward shoulder posture in competitive swimmers. Journal of sport rehabilitation. 2006; 15(1):58.
31. Lynch SS, Thigpen CA, Mihalik JP, Prentice WE, Padua D. The effects of an exercise intervention
on forward head and rounded shoulder postures in elite swimmers. British journal of sports
medicine. 2010; 44(5):376–381. [PubMed: 20371564]
32. Williams JG, Laudner KG, McLoda T. The Acute Effects of Two Passive Stretch Manuevers on
Pectoralis Minor Length and Scapular Kinematics Among Collegiate Swimmers. International
Journal of Sports Physical Therapy. 2013; 8(1):25. [PubMed: 23439770]Harrington et al. Page 10
J Sport Rehabil . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 August 27.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
