♦ International Journal of Shoulder Surgery - Jul-Sep 2015 / Vol 9 / Issue 3 90
Case Report
Sorting swimmers shoulders: An 
observational study on swimmers that 
presented to a shoulder surgeon
Daniel Butler, Len Funk1, Tanya Anne Mackenzie2, Lee C. Herrington2
ABSTRACT
Context:  It is common for swimmers to suffer shoulder injuries resulting in a wealth of research 
focusing on the causes and types of injury. However, there is a lack of evidence regarding current 
management for shoulder injuries in swimmers.
Aims:  To investigate the diagnosis, subsequent management, and the return to swimming 
outcomes for swimmers presenting to an orthopedic practice.
Settings and Design:  Retrospective cohort study of competitive swimmers presenting to an 
orthopedic practice.
Materials and Methods:  The diagnosis, subsequent management, and the return to swimming 
outcomes were analyzed for 14 swimmers whose injuries were managed by a shoulder surgeon.
Statistical Analysis Used:  Descriptive analysis.
Results:  No significant association was identified between swimming stroke and type of injury. 
The majority of swimmers had good scapula rhythm, with no visible dyskinesis, including those 
with impingement. Swimmers with impingement did not require arthroscopy, and with nonoperative 
management had a mean time to return to swimming of 1.6 months. All labral tears required 
arthroscopic labral repair, with these swimmers having a mean time of 2.9 months postsurgery 
to return to swimming.
Conclusion:  The study demonstrated that an accurate diagnosis, and appropriate choice of 
nonoperative and surgical treatments lead to reassuring outcomes for swimmers suffering from 
shoulder injuries.
Key words:  Impingement, labral, return to swimming, shoulder, swimming
INTRODUCTION
Swimming is a popular sport across the world, it is reported that 
23-38% of competitive swimmers suffer shoulder injuries each 
year.[1] The upper limbs provide the majority of the propulsion[2] 
with competitive swimmers achieving over a million repetitive 
over arm movements annually.[3] Elite swimmers average 
around 5000 m/training session, training twice a day, 6 to 7 
days a week, completing approximately 2500 overhead arm 
movements a day.[2] Overuse injuries and irritation to the 
shoulder and surrounding structures can occur as a result. 
Sein et al., 2010,[4] explain that supraspinatus tendinopathy is a consequence of the vast distances these athletes cover.[4] In the 
literature, subacromial impingement is the most commonly 
reported shoulder pathology, and more specifically supraspinatus 
tendinopathy.[4-6] Swimmers are also at high risk of developing 
labral injuries such as superior labral from anterior to posterior 
(SLAP) tears.[7] Previous literature regarding conservative and 
surgical treatment of shoulder injuries in swimmers is limited. 
Current literature describes low return rates to preinjury level for 
most swimmers.[8,9] A systematic review by Gaunt and Maffulli, 
2012,[6] concluded: There is a “scarcity of recent publications 
regarding the treatment and rehabilitation of swimming injuries.” 
This study aims to address this “scarcity” in the literature.The University of Manchester, School 
of Medicine, Oxford Road, Manchester 
M13 9PT, 1Bridgewater Hospital, 
Manchester Arm Clinic, 120 Princess 
Road, Manchester, MA15 5AT, 
2University of Salford, College of Health 
and Social Care, The Crescent, Salford, 
M5 4WT, United Kingdom
Address for correspondence:  
Mrs. Tanya Anne Mackenzie,  
University of Salford, The Crescent, 
Salford, M5 4WT, United Kingdom.  
E-mail: t.a.mackenzie@edu.salford.ac.ukAccess this article online
Website:   
www.internationalshoulderjournal.org
DOI:   
10.4103/0973-6042.161444
Quick Response Code:
Please cite this article as: Butler D, Funk L, Mackenzie TA, Herrington LC. Sorting swimmers shoulders: An observational study on swimmers that presented to a shoulder surgeon. Int J Shoulder Surg 
2015;9:90-3.  
Butler, et al. : An observational study on swimmers that presented to a shoulder surgeon 91 International Journal of Shoulder Surgery - Jul-Sep 2015 / Vol 9 / Issue 3 ♦MATERIALS AND METHODS
A retrospective review was conducted of competitive 
swimmers presenting to the practice over a 6 years period. 
Inclusion criteria was a competitive swimmer of club level and 
above, with a period of failed nonoperative management of 
more than 6 months prior to referral. Retrospective information 
was collected on age, gender, level of swimming, preferred 
stroke, investigations, diagnosis, subsequent management, and 
time taken to return to swimming. From this data relevant 
observations and analyses were made regarding the mechanism 
of injury, diagnoses, management, and return to swimming 
times.
RESULTS
Fourteen swimmers met the selection criteria with a mean 
age of 20 (range: 14-30) years. The group is comprising of nine 
international athletes, two club level, and three Paralympic 
swimmers. The predominant stroke of each swimmer was 
noted with seven swimmers’ swimming freestyle, three 
swimming backstroke, two swimming butterfly, and one 
swimming breaststroke.
Based on clinical examination including Copeland’s, Hawkins 
Kennedy, Neer’s sign, and empty can test, four swimmers were 
diagnosed with subacromial impingement syndrome and three 
with internal impingement. The O’Brien’s test, Speed’s test, 
Kibler test (or anterior slide), and the crank test (or compression 
rotation test) were used to diagnose labral injury. Diagnosis 
of labral injury was confirmed on MR arthrogram imaging 
and during arthroscopy. Five swimmers had labral tears (two 
SLAP tears and three Bankart tears). In addition to a SLAP, one 
swimmer had a HAGL (humeral avulsion of the glenohumeral 
ligament). One swimmer was diagnosed with multidirectional 
joint laxity on the drawer tests and sulcus sign.
Scapular control was observed in ten swimmers. Five (50%) 
were recorded as having “good scapular control” (poor resting 
position of the scapula, but with no scapular dyskinesis on 
motion), two (20%) had “excellent scapular control” (good 
scapula resting position with no scapular dyskinesis on motion), and the remaining three swimmers (30%) had “scapular 
dysrthymia” on examination, as shown in Figure 1. Eight of 
the 14 swimmers had Beighton Scores recorded. Based on the 
suggested normal threshold of joint laxity in a young athlete 
of 4-6,[10] three out of eight (37%) athletes tested by the 
Beighton score had generalized hypermobility. Beighton scores 
for each swimmer are illustrated in Figure 2. All swimmers 
with impingement signs received conservative treatment, 
four received physiotherapy alone, and three had intra-
articular corticosteroid injections. As illustrated in Figure 3, six 
swimmers had surgery. Five with labral pathology underwent 
arthroscopic labral repair surgery inclusive of: Anterior capsular 
plication, SLAP repair, capsular shrinkage, Bankart repair, and 
HAGL repair. The sixth swimmer who underwent surgery had 
anterior instability and had an arthroscopic anterior capsular 
shrinkage. There was no outcome data for three swimmers, 
because one had retired before receiving treatment, another 
retired as a result of the injury, and one did not attend 
follow-up appointments. The mean time taken for swimmers 
who received conservative management inclusive of both 
physiotherapy and intra-articular injections was 1.6 months 
compared with 2.9 months in surgical patients Figure 4.
DISCUSSION
A study by Wymore et al., 2012,[10] found no correlation between 
the preferred stroke of the swimmer and development of the 
shoulder injury. This study supports this finding, with no clear 
link between swimming stroke and type of injury, although the 
majority of the swimmers were freestyle swimmers.
Scapular dyskinesias has been associated with an increased 
likelihood of impingement injuries.[11] Warner et al., 2012,[12] 
demonstrated scapular dyskinesia in 64% of swimmers with 
instability and 100% of swimmers with impingement.[12] 
Madsen et al., 2011,[13] reported 82% of noninjured swimmers 
had scapular dysrhythmias by the end of a training session, 
inferring that scapular dysrhythmia may be a normal variant 
in fatigued swimmers as opposed to a risk factor for shoulder 
injuries. The majority of swimmers in this study had good 
scapula rhythm, with no visible dyskinesis, including those 
in those with chronic impingement. The inconsistency in the 
Figure 1:  Pie chart of scapular control
 Figure 2:  Beighton hypermobility scores

Butler, et al. : An observational study on swimmers that presented to a shoulder surgeon♦ International Journal of Shoulder Surgery - Jul-Sep 2015 / Vol 9 / Issue 3 92
literature means future research into the role of scapular control 
in shoulder injuries in swimmers is required.
The measurement of joint laxity and its usefulness is another 
area with contrasting discussion. The systematic review by 
Gaunt and Maffulli, 2012,[6] concluded that joint laxity is a risk 
factor for injury and warranted further research, and suggested 
that the Beighton hypermobility grading[14] is appropriate for 
this. Despite the belief that hyperlaxity is associated with 
shoulder pathology in the swimming population, only 38% 
of our swimmers had a score higher than 6 on the Beighton 
scale. This is similar to the study by Bak 2010,[8] who found a 
hyperlaxity incidence of 22% in painful swimmers shoulders.
In common with a similar study by Brushøj et al., 2007,[9] labral 
pathology was a common finding in swimmers shoulders, 
with impingement signs the second most common finding. 
Brushøj et al., 2007,[9] reported labral pathology in 69% of 
cases, in this study 83% of arthroscopic procedures were on 
labral pathology. In this study, arthroscopic debridement 
was done and procedures to repair labral pathologies, 50% of 
which were Bankart tears. This finding differs from the study 
by Brushøj et al., 2007,[9] who reported to debridement being 
the most common arthroscopic procedure done on swimmers 
shoulders, and observed only one Bankart tear in a population 
of 18 swimmers.
There is little in the literature with regard to HAGAL injuries 
in swimmers, however the HAGL observed in one swimmer 
was not attributed to the swimming action, instead the injury 
occurred when the athlete pushed off the swimming pool wall. 
This swimmer did not respond to nonoperative therapies and 
required surgical repair.
The average time is taken to return to swimming training after 
arthroscopy was 2.9 months, compared with 4 months reported 
in the study by Brushøj et al., 2007.[9] The return to swimming 
training and competition data in this study was limited to 
eleven swimmers. Brushøj et al., 2007,[9] observed that 44% of 
swimmers who had arthroscopy did not return to swimming. 
Accurate diagnosis improved selection of swimmers eligible 
for arthroscopy in this study may have helped improve the 
success rates.Improvements in imaging and increasingly specialized 
physiotherapy mean there are good alternatives to arthroscopy 
in swimmers with impingement. None of the six swimmers 
with impingement signs underwent arthroscopy, instead 
specialist shoulder physiotherapy combined with intraarticular 
corticosteroid injection, was effective in getting these swimmers 
back to training. In this study only one athlete, who did not 
undergo arthroscopy, did not return to swimming because of 
shoulder pain. A stepwise approach to swimmers presenting 
with impingement signs should be considered, and nonoperative 
treatments tried before surgical intervention. Intra-articular 
injections of steroids can reassure the surgeon to the cause of 
the swimmer’s pain ruling out other possible causes, reducing 
unnecessary risks of an arthroscopic procedure.
In summary, swimmers with impingement injuries do well with 
the appropriate nonoperative treatment; however, athletes with 
labral injuries require surgical intervention.
REFERENCES
1. Walker H, Gabbe B, Wajswelner H, Blanch P , Bennell K. Shoulder 
pain in swimmers: A 12-month prospective cohort study of 
incidence and risk factors. Phys Ther Sport 2012;13:243-9.
2. Pink MM, Tibone JE. The painful shoulder in the swimming 
athlete. Orthop Clin North Am 2000;31:247-61.
3. McMaster WC. Shoulder injuries in competitive swimmers. Clin 
Sports Med 1999;18:349-59, vii.
4. Sein ML, Walton J, Linklater J, Appleyard R, Kirkbride B, Kuah D, 
et al.  Shoulder pain in elite swimmers: Primarily due to swim-
volume-induced supraspinatus tendinopathy. Br J Sports Med 
2010;44:105-13.
5. Tovin BJ. Prevention and treatment of swimmer’s shoulder. N Am 
J Sports Phys Ther 2006;1:166-75.
6. Gaunt T, Maffulli N. Soothing suffering swimmers: A 
systematic review of the epidemiology, diagnosis, treatment 
and rehabilitation of musculoskeletal injuries in competitive 
swimmers. Br Med Bull 2012;103:45-88.
7. Abrams GD, Safran MR. Diagnosis and management of superior 
labrum anterior posterior lesions in overhead athletes. Br J Sports 
Med 2010;44:311-8.
8. Bak K. The practical management of swimmer’s painful 
shoulder: Etiology, diagnosis, and treatment. Clin J Sport Med 
2010;20:386-90.
9. Brushøj C, Bak K, Johannsen HV , Faunø P . Swimmers’ painful 
shoulder arthroscopic findings and return rate to sports. Scand 
J Med Sci Sports 2007;17:373-7.
10. Wymore L, Reeve RE, Chaput CD. No correlation between stroke 
specialty and rate of shoulder pain in NCAA men swimmers. 
Int J Shoulder Surg 2012;6:71-5.Figure 3:  Management of swimmers shoulders
Figure 4:  Mean return to swimming time according to the treatment 
group

Butler, et al. : An observational study on swimmers that presented to a shoulder surgeon 93 International Journal of Shoulder Surgery - Jul-Sep 2015 / Vol 9 / Issue 3 ♦11. Ellenbecker TS, Cools A. Rehabilitation of shoulder impingement 
syndrome and rotator cuff injuries: An evidence-based review. 
Br J Sports Med 2010;44:319-27.
12. Warner JJ, Micheli LJ, Arslanian LE, Kennedy J, Kennedy R. 
Scapulothoracic motion in normal shoulders and shoulders with 
glenohumeral instability and impingement syndrome. A study using 
Moiré topographic analysis. Clin Orthop Relat Res 1992:191-9.
13. Madsen PH, Bak K, Jensen S, Welter U. Training induces 
scapular dyskinesis in pain-free competitive swimmers: A reliability and observational study. Clin J Sport Med 
2011;21:109-13.
14. Beighton P , Solomon L, Soskolne CL. Articular mobility in an 
African population. Ann Rheum Dis 1973;32:413-8.
Source of Support:  Nil, Conflict of Interest:  There are no conflicts 
of interest.
Author Institution Map (AIM)
Please note that not all the institutions may get mapped due to non-availability of requisite information in Google Map. For AIM of other issues, please 
check Archives/Back Issues page on the journal’s website. 
