                     VOLUME 15 | Proc 4 | 2020  |   S1187  
 Supplementary Issue:  Summer  Conferences of Sports Science.  Costa Blanca Sports Science Events, 25-26 September  2020. Alicante , Spain . 
 
Swimming, back pain and electromyography: A 
brief review  
 
CRISTIANA D'ANNA  1    , AURORA D'ALESSANDRO, RODOLFO VASTOLA  
Department of Human, Philosophical and Educational Sciences , University of Salerno , Italy  
 
 
 
ABSTRACT  
 
Background: The low back is the most common site of pain in the population, especially in the adolescent 
population. Several scientific studies in the literature focused on swimming, its effects and the relationship 
with injuries and deformities of the spi ne. Purpose: this brief review, in an attempt to answer this question, 
aims to compare several studies that have focused attention on the relationship between the possible 
appearance of postural problems and swimming activity practiced at a competitive lev el. Methods: a literature 
search was conducted for articles published between 2000 and 2020 with the exception of two pilot studies 
from the 1990s.The review was carried out in the following databases: Web of Science, PubMed , Scopus, 
Science Direct and Goo gle Scholar. In addition, further studies were consulted by accessing specific journals. 
The search terms used were: swimming, electromyography, back -pain, muscles activity, scoliosis, and crawl. 
To select the studies, the following criteria were identifie d: use of electromyography as an investigation tool; 
sample of competitive swimmers aged between 12 and 17 years. Results: the results were summarized in a 
table indicating authors, year of publication, objective, sample, swimming style analysed, research 
methodology and specific results. The analysis of the literature generally shows the existence of a relationship 
between intensity of training and the occurrence and aggravation of dysmorphisms or paramorphisms. In 
addition, the selected studies show the i mportance assigned to core training in the prevention of postural 
imbalances . 
Keywords : Swimming; Back pain; Electromyography; Posture; Adolescence . 
 
1 Corresponding author. Department of Human, Philosophical and Educational Sciences, University of Salerno, Italy . 
https://orcid.org/0000 -0003 -0216 -0318  
E-mail:  cdanna@unisa.it  
Abstract  submitted to : Spring  Conferences of Sports Science. Costa Blanca Sports Science Events , 19-20 June  2020. Alicante, 
Spain . 
 JOURNAL OF HUMAN SPORT & EXERCISE ISSN 1988 -5202  
 © Faculty of Education. University of Alicante  
 doi:10.14198/jhse.20 20.15.Proc 4.20 
Cite this article as:  
D‘Anna , C., D‘Alessandro , A., & Vastola , R. (2020). Swimming, back pain and electromyography: A brief 
review . Journal of Human Sport and Exercise, 1 5(4proc), S 1187-S119 4. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.14198/jhse.2020.15.Proc4.20  Proceeding  
D‘Anna , et al.  / Swimming, back pain & electromyography: Review                                  JOURNAL OF HUMAN SPORT & EXERCISE  
S1188  | 2020 | Proc4  | VOLUME 1 5                                                                                 © 2020  University of Alicante  
 INTRODUCTION  
 
The low back is the most common site of pain in the population, especially in the adolescent population (Haus 
& Micheli, 2012).  
 
Several scientific studies in the literature focused on swimming, its effects and the relationship with injuries 
and deformities of the spine (Martens e t al., 2015; Folkvardsen et al., 2016; Jones, 1999). For years the 
ability to correct the postural structure of those who practice it has been attributed to swimming, but the 
studies of the last fifty years have progressively denied this quality, highlight ing how this statement cannot 
be subject to generalizations, but that situations must be analysed  according to specific cases. This study 
arises from the need to understand whether swimming, practiced at a competitive level and with a certain 
workload, can  affect the normal development of the structures and curves of the spine.  
 
Research in this area began in the early 1900s, particularly in the service sector. Subsequently, the studies 
evolved and became more and more complex, touching on different aspects , going beyond the performance 
area alone and starting to approach the functional, physiological and sometimes clinical area.  
 
The evolution of the studies is mainly to be associated with technological evolution which in this area plays 
a role of priority importance, as the development of increasingly sophisticated technologies has allowed 
progressively more detailed, accurate and safe observations.  
 
In relation to the specific case of EMG, it is possible to note how not only observation and detection have 
become easier, but also how the various steps have allowed new fields of applications and greater speed, 
precision and reliability in the acquisition of data, especially as regards swimming, which certainly requires 
the preparation of a type  of technology that is more developed than in other environments and situations.  
 
The development of these studies has often raised debates related to the positive or negative effects of 
swimming, sometimes drawing generalizations that do not take into acc ount the necessary distinctions to be 
placed at the basis of the observation: competition and amateurism, a factor that significantly affects the 
moment in which we intend to address the functional and physiological aspect.  
 
MATERIALS AND METHODS  
 
The literature analysis was mainly done using the following databases: Google Scholar, PubMed , Web of 
Science. In addition, further studies were consulted by accessing the following specific journals: " Journal of 
Electromyography and Kinesiology ", "The Jou rnal of Pediatric ", "International journal of sports physiology 
and performance ", "Journal of Sports Sciences ". 
 
The literature search was done using the following keywords: swimming, EMG, Back -pain, muscles activity, 
scoliosis, crawl.  
 
Once the articles t hat corresponded to these lines were collected, a new criterion was used, so as to be able 
to highlight and select more and more accurately the articles and searches that comply with the lines 
described below.  
 
1. Period. The articles and research carried out  in the period from the 2000s to today were selected, 
except for two studies from the last half of the 90s. The latter have been selected because they 
D‘Anna , et al. / Swimming, back pain & electromyography: Review                                  JOURNAL OF HUMAN SPORT & EXERCISE  
                     VOLUME 15 | Proc 4 | 2020  |   S1189  
 represent the pilot studies for the subsequent ones, which not only laid the foundations, but also 
provid ed what were the first insights in this direction.  
2. Studies with EMG. The criterion subsequently applied concerns the choice of the EMG as an 
investigation tool. In fact, those articles were chosen that used it as the main tool, in what are its 
different fo rms and evolutions.  
3. Age of the sample. Once the period of interest and the specific research area have been selected, 
another selection criterion has been added, in relation to the age of the participants in the 
observations. Studies were therefore selecte d that had subjects between the ages of 12 and 20 as 
participants, as they were considered the most sensitive to these changes.  
4. Competitive athletes. A further selection criterion meant that the attention referred to studies in which 
the participants were agonists at national and international level, therefore effectively engaged in 
competitions on a regular basis and therefore subjected to a certain type of training. And this is 
precisely the last criterion used, that is, research  that included athletes wh o respond to a total of 
hours of weekly training between 18 and 24 hours were taken into consideration. Some of them even 
with multiple training sessions per day. Finally, some of the selected articles present a control group 
consisting of non -competitive athletes, with the aim of recording whether the results achieved for 
individual cases were actually directly related to the competitive condition or not.  
 
The analysis of the literature identified through the criteria was mainly aimed at identifying the ob jectives and 
results of these.  
 
RESULTS  
 
The summary table ( Table 1) summarizes the results of the review, highlighting for each study selected in 
the literature: the intended objectives, the sample, the swimming styles under investigation, the research 
methodology used and the results. The analysis of the literature made it possible to relate the work of different 
scholars, who have experimented in different countries and years, but with the same intuition and often 
converging on the results obt ained.  
 
Table 1. Summary table.  
Author  
and Year  Target  Participants  Swimming 
Style  Type  
of EMG  Results  
Ruwe  
(1994)  Study the activity of the 
mainly effected muscles 
during swimming in a 
relation with all 
swimming styles. The 
analysis includes a 
comparison between 
swimmers with and 
without Back -Pain.  25 swimmers 
without Back -Pain 
and 14 swimmers 
with Back -Pain Breaststroke  Telemetric 
EMG  In the swimmers 
with Back -Pain 
situation the 
muscles activity is 
irregular. These 
situations caused an 
opposite  
compensation to the 
pain.  
Verni et al.  
(1999)  An investigation of spine 
pain caused by 
swimming.  14 swimmers but 
only 7 with spine 
pain at the 
beginning of the 
study.  Crawl  EMGS  Swimming 
contributes to 
accentuating spinal 
deformity conditions, 
if they aren’t well 
treated before 
starting a 
competitive activity.  
D‘Anna , et al.  / Swimming, back pain & electromyography: Review                                  JOURNAL OF HUMAN SPORT & EXERCISE  
S1190  | 2020 | Proc4  | VOLUME 1 5                                                                                 © 2020  University of Alicante  
 Santana  
(2005)  Effect of Core training in 
the competitive and not 
competitive swimmers 
training program.  University of 
Florida swimming 
team composed 
to 24 athletes.  All EMGS  The correct 
stimulation of the 
core muscles allows 
a more precise and 
stronger technical 
gesture.  
Caty  
(2007)  Study of stabilizer 
muscles in freestyle 
(crawl).  7 male swimmers 
that participate to 
international 
competitions in 
100 Freestyle. 
They are to 20 at 
22 years old.  Crawl  EMG fine 
wire 
telemetric  The Core is one of 
the main stabilizing 
areas in Freestyle.  
Knobloch et 
al. (2008)  Observation based on 
the high presence of 
injuries and Back -Pain in 
swimmers that are 
subject to high intense 
training . 341 elite 
swimmers. They 
are to 11 at 19 
years old.  Crawl e 
Butterfly  EMGS  The athletes who 
practice swimming 
to high levels, have 
the most risk of 
developing Back -
Pain conditions 
during the training if 
they aren’t well 
observed too.  
Angela  
(2011)  Analysis of Core training 
in a relationship between 
performance and Back -
Pain in swimming.  18 athletes that 
are observed in 
12 weeks during 
training.  Crawl e 
backstroke  EMGS  If there is a good 
level of strength 
expressed by the 
Core, is possible 
prevents the risk of 
accentuating 
situation of spine 
deformity and also it 
contributes to an 
improvement of 
performance.  
Wanivenhaus 
et al. (2012)  Study on swimmers that 
have a predisposition to 
develop pain and spine 
deformities.  35 members of 
Canadian O lympic 
team.  Crawl  EMG  Subjects that have 
slight postural 
imbalances at the 
beginning of the 
sport activity are 
more predisposed to 
develop pain and 
spine deformity.  
Lauer  
(2013)  Application and 
coactivation of the 
muscles that are 
examined during 
Frees tyle. It is based on 
the different phases of 
the technical gesture.  10 athletes that 
participate at 
international 
competitions in 
200 Freestyle. 
They are to 19 at 
22 years old.  Crawl  EMGS on -
line The surveys of the 
muscles activity 
during the technical 
gesture in the 
swimming, It 
highlights how the 
Core is also 
stressed during the 
process of dynamic 
balance maintaining.  
D‘Anna , et al. / Swimming, back pain & electromyography: Review                                  JOURNAL OF HUMAN SPORT & EXERCISE  
                     VOLUME 15 | Proc 4 | 2020  |   S1191  
 Zaina et al.  
(2015)  Comparison between 
spine deformities and 
Back -Pain.  112 teens that 
participate to 
swimming 
competitions and 
217 students that 
practice 
swimming as a 
free time activity.  
They are 
approximately 13 
years old.  Crawl  EMGS  Swimming can 
increase to arise 
spinal deformities 
and Back -Pain 
conditions.  
Martens et al.  
(2015)  Study with EMG to 
analyse  the most 
stressed muscles in all 
swimming styles.  200 Athletes that 
are divided in four 
groups to 50 
swimmers.  Crawl, 
breaststroke, 
butterfly e 
backstroke  EMGS  The muscles that 
most influence the 
Postural and 
functional aspects 
are the muscles 
stressed in  freestyle 
and butterfly style.  
Parvis et al. 
(2016)  A study on diseases, 
injuries and spine 
curvatures after 
swimming rehabilitation. 
The study focuses the 
attention also on 
frequency with which 
these conditions may 
arise. Moreover, 
observed the 
relationship between the 
intensity of movement 
and the situation of 
Back -Pain during the 
sporting season.  27 competitive 
swimmers that 
participate to 
international and 
national 
competitions.  Crawl  EMG  The research shows 
how intense 
swimming training 
and ac tivity. 
Especially after 
rehabilitation 
periods, increases 
the possibility to 
develop an irregular 
accentuation of 
physiological curves.  
 
DISCUSSION  
 
Each article has been read and studied to understand not only what the research activity was, but above a ll 
the methodology, dynamics and context that characterized them. The choice to include articles prior to the 
selected period, in fact, was dictated by the desire to understand what were the bases and the starting points 
that gave rise to such an interest in research in this area. In fact, it has been noted that the intuition of these 
articles has not proved wrong, despite the underdeveloped technologies, but on the contrary, subsequent 
studies have corroborated the thesis already expressed, enriching it wi th further elements, which have proved 
necessary for the understanding of these aspects. The analysis started from what was a common belief, 
namely that swimming activity was a complete activity, but this vision soon became more and more 
characterized by e lements that do not completely deny this perspective but do not even confirm it completely. 
In fact, it is not wrong to define swimming as a complete sport, but in this perspective, aspects such as the 
natural asymmetry deriving from the spontaneous domina nce of one side of the body must be considered, 
which generates a different tone between the two parts and consequently generates different thrusts that 
affect not only muscle development but also on the technical gesture that in the long run can, if exces sively 
stressed, weigh on any imbalances already present at a structural level. The analysis also highlighted the 
need for a careful medical history for each individual athlete not only in relation to research, but to be extended 
D‘Anna , et al.  / Swimming, back pain & electromyography: Review                                  JOURNAL OF HUMAN SPORT & EXERCISE  
S1192  | 2020 | Proc4  | VOLUME 1 5                                                                                 © 2020  University of Alicante  
 to the entire process foll owed by competitive athletes. Furthermore, once the common elements of the 
various studies have been collected, which have given rise to reflections such as the one just exposed, these 
have been compared to detect any discordant elements. Once this study a nd comparison work has been 
done, the collected data have been included in the table that represents the brief review of this work.  The 
first articles analysed  in this study refers to the works of Ruwe (1994) and Verni et al. (1999).  Ruwe dedicates 
his attention to a study that focuses on an observation aimed at which muscles are mainly involved in the 
various swimming styles, taking two groups of swimmers as a study sample. The first group consisted of 
swimmers who did not have back -pain conditions, the second group did. It is the first study in which we can 
observe the presence of a control group, a need also linked to the need to identify whether the back -pain 
conditions can actually be generalized to both groups or understand how often these conditions affect the 
activities of one group or the other. In Ruwe's case, the study was carried out mainly in relation to the back 
style, and the measurements obtained w ith the EMG methodology showed how in the case of back -pain 
situations (therefore in the case of the second group) the activation of the muscles is irregular and it tends 
towards an opposite compensation to pain, this inevitably leads to an asymmetrical de velopment of 
movement and structures, aggravating what were the starting conditions. In fact, it was one of the first articles 
to disprove what was considered the " corrective power " of swimming.  As regards the study carried out by 
Verni et al. (1999) an in vestigation was carried out on the pains in the spine resulting from swimming. This 
study was carried out in collaboration with Comitato Olimpico Nazionale Italiano (CONI), and in this case, we 
are faced with an observation with a control group. Swimmers w ith spinal deformities (scoliosis, hyper 
kyphosis and hyperlordosis) were selected, while none of the participants found similar conditions in the 
second group. Also, in this study, the methodology used to understand the movement of muscles in relation 
to their action on the spine is the EMG. The study was able to affirm that swimming contributes to accentuate 
the conditions of spinal deformity, which the first group had already from the beginning of the study, in 
particular if these are not well treated be fore the start of the competitive activity, integrating with others types 
of work involving postural correction.  With the analysis more and more accurate and evolved with respect to 
the studies just illustrated, Santana (2005), carries out a research on wh at are the muscles that apparently 
do not seem involved in swimming activity, focusing her attention on the role played by the core in the 
technical gesture. Santana, for his study will use the EMGS which will allow him to affirm, even after careful 
observ ation also addressed to the training programs, that the correct stimulation of the core muscles allows 
a more precise and stronger technical gesture. This will be responsible for controlling and adjusting the 
position, so that the athlete has less effort i n finding the correct balance and therefore being able to use more 
energy in the stroke and kick. It is precisely in relation to the concept of stability that we find the study analysed  
later, carried out by Caty in 2007. His study focuses on the observati on of the movement stabilizer muscles 
regarding the crawl. The athletes who took part in the study specialize in 100M freestyle and are more 
involved in international competitions. The observation in this case was carried out with telemetry EMG and  
has hig hlighted once again the central role of the Core in the process of stability of the movement. This 
concept is fundamental in particular at high levels. The study published in 2011 by Angela, which through the 
use of the EMGS, monitors the activity of the C ore, put it in relation to cases of back -pain and observing it at 
the same time under the aspect of high performance level. In fact, at the end of her study, Angela affirms that 
what can be defined as a good level of strength, expressed by the Core, contri butes to the prevention of the 
risk of accentuating situations of spinal deformity and at the same time contributes to an increase in the level 
of performance. The main reference article for what was the literature search is the one published by Jonas 
Martens et al. in the Journal of Electromyography and Kinesiology (2015). This article aims to collect the 
most relevant studies within the four swimming styles of the last fifty years. The study focused on the 
observation of the muscles most involved in the f our styles, and on those that interact directly on the 
deformities of the spine. In the same article there is a review that collects not only all the most relevant studies 
in this area but collects all the most cutting -edge articles for each period. The au thors, as well as thanks to 
D‘Anna , et al. / Swimming, back pain & electromyography: Review                                  JOURNAL OF HUMAN SPORT & EXERCISE  
                     VOLUME 15 | Proc 4 | 2020  |   S1193  
 their own observations, but also supported by the collection and analysis of previous studies, agree that the 
muscles that most influence the postural and functional aspect are identifiable with those stressed mostly in 
freestyl e and in the butterfly style. Furthermore, within the research, it is highlighted how intense swimming 
sporting activity, in particular after periods of rehabilitation, increases the risk of an irregular accentuation of 
the physiological curves, an aspect in common with the most recent article of the review of this study (Parvis 
et al. 2016). Based on what has been stated so far, we can therefore conclude by stating that there is indeed 
a significant relationship between all the structures of our body, as r egards the role played by muscle chains 
and the Core, in swimming. This performs various functions including support, protection and antagonist of 
the spinal column; it is also responsible for the adjustment function as regards movement, it is a source of 
stability and strength. From the analysis of the literature it also emerged that as regards the deformities of 
the spine, the onset cannot be traced back to swimming, but the same thing cannot be said for the 
accentuation of any pre -existing conditions. Th is is the reason why integration with real forms of corrective 
exercise, external to swimming, is recommended. Finally, the way in which the activity is approached and 
practiced is one of the pillars of the investigation. In fact, it emerged that swimming practiced at a competitive 
level, given the prolonged times and the intensity of training, favours  possible injuries such as the 
consumption of cartilage and the possibility, in the long run, of favouring  back -pain conditions.  
 
CONCLUSION  
 
The use of electromyography, as an investigation tool to analyse  the activation of the various muscles 
involved in the sporting gesture of swimming, brings together all the scientific studies selected in this review, 
that compared several studies that have  focused attention on the relationship between the possible 
appearance of postural problems and swimming activity practiced at a competitive level in agonist 
adolescents that are between 12 to 20 years old.  
 
From this brief review emerged a series of refle ctions:  
- The analysis of the literature generally shows the existence of a relationship between training 
intensity and the occurrence and aggravation of dysmorphisms or paramorphisms.  
- More studies that are selected show the importance of core training in the prevention to postural 
imbalances. The review shows that over the years (from the 90s to today) the concept of training has 
changed considerably about swimming programs; in fact, it emerges that the most recent workouts 
have as a priority o bjective the development of functional structures that do not have negative 
consequences on posture in general and on the daily life of athletes.  
- The aspect of prevention of postural imbalances is more and more central to the design of 
competitive level tr aining.  
 
In conclusion, the analysis of the literature provides the necessary data to understand how the general 
activation of the muscles, in particular of the core, in swimming, favours  the improvement of the performance 
level, both by activating a preve ntive action towards the maintenance of physiological curves of the spine 
which reducing the risk of developing any pathological situations or backpain.  
 
Certainly, the present study is not without its critical points. It would be interesting to look at ot her studies that 
use different investigation tools such as kinematic analysis with inertial sensors or video analysis. Considering 
the evidence that emerged, it is proposed to carry out a biomechanical study of the four swimming styles in 
elite athletes th rough an integrated approach.  
 
 
D‘Anna , et al.  / Swimming, back pain & electromyography: Review                                  JOURNAL OF HUMAN SPORT & EXERCISE  
S1194  | 2020 | Proc4  | VOLUME 1 5                                                                                 © 2020  University of Alicante  
 REFERENCES  
 
Angela, E., 2011. Development and evaluation of a core training programme in highly trained swimmers. 
PhD Thesis. Teesside University.  
Caty, V., Aujouannet, Y., Hintzy, F., Bonifazi, M., Clarys, J.P. & Rouard, A. H. 2007. Wrist stabilisation 
and forearm muscle coactivation during freestyle swimming. In Journal Electromyogr 
Kinesiol;17:285 -91. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jelekin.2006.02.005  
Folkvardsen, S.,  Magnussen, E., Karppinen, J., Auvinen, J., Larsen, R. H., Wong, C., & Bendix, T. 2016. 
Does elite swimming accelerate lumbar intervertebral disc degeneration and increase low back pain? 
A cross -sectional comparison. In European Spine Journal, 25(9), 2849 -2855. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00586 -016-4642 -x 
Haus, B.M. & Micheli, L.J. 2012. Back pain in the pediatric and adolescent athlete. In Clin Sports Med. 
2012 Jul;31(3):423 -40. Epub 2012 May 3. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csm.2012.03.011  
Jones, J. H.  1999. Swimming overuse injuries. In Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Clinics, 10(1), 77 -
94. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1047 -9651(18)30217 -1 
Knobloch, K., Yoon, U., Kraemer, R., & Vogt, P. M. 2008. 200 -400 m breaststroke event dominate among 
knee overuse injuries in elite swimming athletes. Sportverletzung Sportschaden: Organ der 
Gesellschaft fur Orthopadisch -Traumatologische Sportmedizin, 22(4), 213 -219. 
https://doi.org/10.1055/s -2008 -1027987  
Lauer, J., Figueiredo., P., Vilas -Boas, J.P., Fernandes, R.J. & Rouard, A.H. 2013. Phase -dependence of 
elbow muscle coactivation in front crawl swimming. Journal Electromyogr Kinesiol 2013;23:820 -5. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jelekin.2013.02.004  
Martens, J., Figueiredo, P.D. & Daly, D. 2015. Electromyography in the four competitive swimming 
strokes: A systematic review. In Journal of Electromy ography and Kinesiology, Volume 25, Issue 2, 
April 2015, Pages 273 -291. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jelekin.2014.12.003  
Parvis, V., Grassini, S., Angelini, E. & Scattareggia, P. 2016. Swimming sym metry assessment via 
multiple inertial measurements, 2016 IEEE International Symposium on Medical Measurements and 
Applications (MeMeA), Benevento, 1 -6. https://doi.org/10.1109/MeMeA.2016.7533765  
Ruwe., P.A., Pink, M., Jobe, F.W., Perry, J. & Scovazzo, M.L. 1994. The normal and the painful shoulders 
during the breaststroke: electromyographic and cinematographic analysis of twelve muscles. Am J 
Sports Med. 1994;22(6):789 -796. https://doi.org/10.1177/036354659402200610  
Santana, J. C. 2003. The serape effect: A kinesiological model for core training. Strength & Conditioning 
Journal, 2003, 25.2: 73 -74. https://doi.org/10.1519/00126548 -200304000 -00013  
Verni, E., Prosperi, L., Lucaccini, C., & Fedele, L. 1999. Lumbar pain and fin swimming. In Journal of 
sports medicine and physical fitness, 39(1), 61.  
Wanivenhaus F, Fox AJ, Chaudhury S , Rodeo SA. 2012. Epidemiology of injuries and prevention 
strategies in competitive swimmers. Sports Health, 4(3):246 -251. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1941738112442132  
Zaina, F., Donzelli, S., Lusini, M. , Minnella, S. & Negrini, S. 2015. Swimming and Spinal Deformities: A 
Cross -Sectional Study. In The Journal of pediatrics, 166(1), 163 -167. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpeds.2014.09.024  
 
 
 
This work is licensed under a Attribution -NonCommercial -NoDerivatives 4.0 International  (CC BY -NC-ND 4.0).  

