Introduction
Swimming is a popular recreational and professional sport 
code both locally and internationally . The South African 
swimming team represents South Africa at the Olympics 
and other world-level competitions. To ensure that these 
participants and those who will replace them on the world 
arena can function optimally, it is essential to keep them 
injury-free. In order to ensure that the best conditioning pro -
grammes are developed it is important to know the incidence 
and other related information pertaining to injury in these 
athletes. The shoulder joint is the most vulnerable to injury, 
as has been shown in many reports.3,6,8-11 To date very little 
research on the epidemiology of shoulder or other injuries in 
South African swimmers has been published in the scientific 
literature.
Literature from several developed countries reveals 
information on the incidence,1,2,7,8 and types1,7,8,9 of shoulder 
injuries as well as the effects of training7 on shoulder injury 
sustained in this sport.  Most swimming injuries are due to 
repetitive microtrauma and overuse, with many of these 
injuries actually due to faulty technique.10,11 Repeated 
microtrauma and overuse strain of passive and active 
components of the shoulder lead to diminished performance 
over a period of time (overuse) and can lead to acute injury, 
resulting in reduced ability or an inability to participate in the 
sport.  In both cases, professional training programmes, and 
sport-specific conditioning are crucial in determining whether 
participation and performance can be optimised. 
When one considers the biomechanics of the shoulder 
joint and the demand placed on it during each of the 
swimming strokes, it becomes clear that a very high level 
of specificity in conditioning is appropriate. The structural 
limitations imposed by a shallow glenoid cavity together with 
a large degree of motion suggest the need for balanced 
muscle control at all times.13 
The main power of propulsion is provided by arm action 
during the pull phase in all strokes, with the exception of 
breaststroke.14 Athletes, who use the arm for propelling, 
strain at the extremes of joint range in their drive for 
maximum performance.13 Repetitive motion at the extremes 
of range are supported by the stabilising structures or 
‘restraint mechanisms’ which prevent excessive translation 
of the humeral head on the glenoid fossa. If any one of the orIgInal research arTIcle
shoulder injuries in competitive swimmers in KwaZulu-  
natal
T Puckree (Bsc Physio, Ms (exercise science), Med, PhD (exercise Physiology)1 
K J Thomas (B Physio)2
1  Department of Physiotherapy, University of Kwazulu-Natal, Durban, and School of Physiotherapy, Sport Science and Optometry, University 
of KwaZulu-Natal, Westville Campus, Durban
2 Final-year physiotherapy student, Department of Physiotherapy, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban
abstract
objective.  To determine the incidence of shoulder inju -
ries in competitive swimmers in KwaZulu-Natal, a province 
in South Africa. 
Design.  A cross-sectional survey was conducted. A ran -
dom sample of 96 swimmers from a pool of 300 swim -
mers registered with first-division clubs affiliated to the 
KwaZulu-Natal Aquatics Association participated in the 
study by informed voluntary consent. Data were gathered 
using a validated questionnaire. 
setting.  Data were gathered at time trials, races and club 
meetings.
Main measures.  Variables monitored included the inci -
dence of shoulder injuries, shoulder pain and proportion 
of overuse injury . 
results.  Seventy-one per cent of the swimmers had 
shoulder pain and 64% reported injury to the shoulder. 
Forty-six per cent of the swimmers with pain complained 
of anterior shoulder pain, while 65% of all injuries were 
due to overuse. The commonest diagnoses included 
tendonitis (35%), muscle imbalance (29%), impingement 
(19%) and other (17%). Sixty-nine per cent of the swim -
mers swam freestyle which was related to 70% of the inju -
ries. Eighty-one per cent of the injured swimmers sought 
physiotherapy for the shoulder pain. conclusion.
 The incidence of shoulder injuries in com -
petitive swimmers is high. This study shows the need for 
more research into swimming injuries, and the condition -
ing and rehabilitation of athletes in South Africa.
corresPonDence:
T Puckree 
Department of Physiotherapy
University of KwaZulu-Natal
Private Bag X54001
Durban
4000
Tel: 031-260 7977/7817
Fax: 031-260 8106
E-mail: puckreet@ukzn.ac.z a
10                                 saJsM  vol 18  no. 1  2006
shoulder injuries.indd   10 3/13/06   2:40:25 PM
saJsM  vol 18  no. 1  2006                                                                                                                      11mechanisms does not function properly injury will result. The 
rotator cuff stabilises the head of the humerus in the centre of 
the glenoid cavity, while the prime movers provide the power. 
A well-functioning rotator cuff prevents excess movement 
or translation of the humeral head in anterior, posterior and 
superior directions. Fatigue of the supraspinatus muscle 
predisposes the shoulder to injury due to abnormal humeral 
movement.11 Resistance training to increase strength of the 
rotator cuff and the scapular stabilising muscles has been 
suggested to control the risk of injury4.  The stabilising 
structures include passive components (ligaments, joint 
capsule, joint cohesion mechanism, negative intra-articular 
pressure) and the active component (rotator cuff). Core 
strengthening, especially of the lower abdominal muscles, is 
important in supporting the trunk during arm movements.9
A search for new scientific reports on swimming-related 
shoulder injuries revealed just a single publication in 2003.9 
In South Africa and KwaZulu-Natal (KZN) the current status 
of the epidemiology of swimming injuries is not known. This 
deficit will impact on the performance of our swimmers in the 
international arena. In order to address this gap, the present 
study looked at the incidence and causes of injuries in club-
level competitive elite swimmers in KZN.
Methods
All competitive swimmers (those who swam a qualifying time 
for the 2000 provincial team and achieved provincial colours) 
regardless of gender or race, between the ages of 13 and 25 
years registered with the KZN Aquatics Association made up 
the population. From this pool of 300 swimmers, a random 
sample of 96 athletes were invited to participate after being 
fully informed and giving voluntary consent. Information on 
participants’ personal details, medical and sporting history, 
training history and epidemiology of current and previous 
swimming-related shoulder injuries was obtained using a 
validated questionnaire17 with open and closed-ended ques -
tions. 
The data were analysed descriptively and statistically 
using chi-square tests (SPSS version 6.0 for Windows). 
Probability was set at p < 0.05.
results 
The response rate was 83%. Eighty-one per cent of the 
questionnaires were usable. Forty-seven per cent of the 
respondents were female. Seventy-one per cent of the 
respondents experienced shoulder pain, while 64% report -
ed actual shoulder injuries which included impingement, 
supraspinatus and bicipital tendonitis, bursitis and muscle 
strain. Fifty-two per cent of the injured swimmers were male. 
Sixty-five per cent of the injuries were due to overuse (recur -
rent) as opposed to traumatic injuries (25%), which is similar 
to the findings reported by McMaster et al.12  
Ninety-six per cent of the swimmers trained and participated 
in events for 11 - 12 months of the year. Significantly more 
swimmers between the ages of 15 and 16 years (23%) were 
injured compared with 14 - 18% in the other age categories.  Sixty-nine percent of the swimmers reported swimming 
freestyle. The majority (70%) of the swimmers attributed their 
injuries to freestyle, which they swam most of the time. 
The majority of specialist sprinters (70%), regardless of 
gender, complained of shoulder injuries compared with long-
distance swimmers.
The average length of a training session for a KZN swimmer 
was 90 minutes. The training sessions were not individualised 
or specific, and were unsupervised. The majority of the 
swimmers trained twice daily on weekdays, with an average 
of 11 sessions per week. In addition the majority participated 
in resistance training programmes. Seventy-seven per cent of 
the swimmers with shoulder injuries participated in resistance 
training (gym, strengthening exercises). The use of paddles 
during resistance training did not have any significant effect 
on the difference between those with and without injuries. 
Those swimmers who reported no injury spent more 
time (15 minutes or more) doing stretches and warm-ups 
compared with 10 minutes or less by the injured swimmers. 
Detailed information on the stretches done was not obtained 
in an effort to contain the length of the questionnaire. 
Stretching was 1 component of the training programme.
The commonest site of pain was the anterior shoulder 
(55% females and 40% males). Anterior shoulder pain was 
attributed to supraspinatus and bicipital tendonitis. Tendonitis 
(35%), muscle imbalance (29%) and impingement (19%) 
were significantly more common than bursitis, muscle strain 
and laxity, which combined were responsible for the remaining 
17% of injuries. 
Seventy-five per cent of the swimmers who complained of 
shoulder injuries had to stop swimming temporarily due to the 
injury . Length of time away from swimming was on average 
2 - 3 weeks. 
Of the 52 swimmers who reported injuries, 79% received 
physiotherapy, which was reportedly effective for both the 
management and prevention of overuse injuries. No details of 
the specific physiotherapy modalities used were elicited. One 
respondent required surgical intervention for a glenohumeral 
joint problem. 
Discussion
Sixty-five per cent of the injuries reported by elite swimmers 
who participated in the study were overuse (recurrent) in 
nature, which is similar to the findings of McMaster et al.12 
This can be attributed to the fact that 96% of the swimmers 
trained and participated in events for 11 - 12 months of the 
year. Therefore little time was allowed for rest or recupera -
tion and for repair following injury .  In addition, in order to 
be able to compete at provincial and national levels, the 
training schedules are extremely demanding due to the high 
volume, intensity, duration and frequency of training ses -
sions. Swimming injuries involve upper-limb overuse due to 
the magnitude of repetitive activities.5,15 McMaster et al.12 
estimate that if a swimmer swims an average of 10 km per 
day for 5 days a week and 10 months of the year, with an 
shoulder injuries.indd   11 3/13/06   2:40:26 PM
12               saJsM  vol 18  no. 1  2006average of 15 strokes per length of a 25 m pool, this will 
translate into 1 200 000 repetitive arm movements per year. 
The KZN swimmer undertakes more than this, as shown in 
the results.
The fact that more swimmers between the ages of 15 
and 16 years (23%) compared with the other age categories, 
were injured may suggest that during this period of rapid 
growth, adolescents are particularly vulnerable to injuries. 
This is partially due to an imbalance between strength and 
flexibility .2 The imbalance could be in the strength between 
the agonists and antagonists, the relationship between 
flexibility and strength of the agonists and antagonists or 
between strength of the core stabilisers, scapular stabilisers 
and rotator cuff muscles which all help to stabilise during 
rapid mobility of the glenohumeral joint.9
The majority of specialist sprinters (70%) regardless 
of gender complained of shoulder injuries compared with 
long-distance swimmers. This also supports the findings of 
Richardson.15 During a sprint, the arms turn over at a very 
rapid rate compared with the slower more relaxed technique 
employed by distance swimmers. The increased rate and 
speed at which the arms move overhead as well as the 
added power in the arm action to propel the sprinter through 
the water could cause repeated microtrauma to structures in 
the shoulder joint. 
Freestyle is a very popular stroke amongst KZN competitive 
swimmers. The freestyle stroke utilises repetitive reciprocal 
overhead action. The majority (70%) of the swimmers 
attributed their injuries to freestyle, which they swam most of 
the time. This finding is supported by the study of Richardson 
et al.16 which reported a 75% incidence of shoulder injuries 
in freestyle swimmers. The repetitive action predisposes 
these swimmers to injury . The fact that the swimmers’ 
training requires more than 1 million overhead strokes per 
year increases their risk of shoulder injury .
The use of stretching and warm-ups prior to training seems 
to be effective in controlling injury rate. Stretching and warm-
ups help to increase the range of motion, minimise incidence 
of musculotendinous injuries, minimise muscle soreness and 
reduce the risk of injury .7 Swimming is performed in a non-
weight-bearing medium.1 Resistance training can increase 
muscular strength and reduce the incidence of overuse 
injuries.4 The injures sustained by 77% of the swimmers who 
participated in resistance training in this study could be due to 
problems with the manner in which the resistance exercises 
were performed. Therefore professional training programmes 
and appropriate swimming-specific supervision may help. 
Resistance training and conditioning or rehabilitation must 
be sport-specific.
Length of time away from swimming due to injury was 2 
- 3 weeks, which is in keeping with suggestions by Baxter-
Jones et al.2 who reported a recovery time of 13 days or 
more after an injury was sustained.
Preventive physiotherapy or teamwork between coaches, fitness specialists, physiotherapists and physicians could 
help swimmers overcome the burden of overuse injuries. 
Preventive physiotherapy should include all of the following: 
education on the condition; risks of the sport; motor control 
(in lay terms) of the shoulder action in swimming; recognition 
of danger signals; use of equipment; rest; balanced flexibility 
of the rotator cuff, scapular stabilisers, glenohumeral 
mobilisers and core stabilisers; strength training on land 
and water for the above muscle groups; core stability and 
endurance; cross-training for endurance and speed; and skill 
development through swimming-specific movement patterns. 
All of these will assist in adapting the muscular and neural 
mechanisms to optimise motor control during the sport.  
conclusion
The results of this study show that the incidence of shoulder 
injuries in KZN elite swimmers is significantly high. Similar to 
the findings of other investigators, overuse injuries predomi -
nated. This study shows the need for more research, spe -
cificity of biokinetic training and advanced levels of training 
and coaching to prevent or control injury rates in competitive 
swimmers, at least in KZN. The training programmes should 
include structured rest periods, cross-training that focuses 
on strength, endurance, speed, flexibility and co-ordination 
in sport-specific patterns of movement, periodisation and 
skill development.
references
1.  Allegrucci M, Whitney SL, Irrgang JJ. Clinical implications of secondary 
impingement of the shoulder in freestyle swimmers. J Orthop Sports Phys 
Ther 1994; 20: 307-18.
2.  Baxter-Jones A, Maffulli N, Helms P .  Low injury rates in elite athletes. 
Arch Dis Child  1993; 68: 130-2.
3.  Birrer P . The shoulder, EMG and the swimming stroke. J Swim Res  1986; 
2(5): 20-3. 
4.  Fleck SJ, Falkel JE. Value of resistance training for the reduction of sports 
injuries.  Sports Med  1986; 3(1): 61-8.
5.   Fowler P . Swimmers problems. Am J Sports Med  1970; 2:141-4.
6.  Fowler PJ, Webster MS. Shoulder pain in highly competitive swimmers. 
Orthop Trans  1983; 7(1): 170.
7.  Griep JF . Swimmers shoulder. The influence of flexibility and weight train -
ing. Orthop Trans  1986; 10: 216. 
8.  Jones JH, Swimming overuse injuries.  Phys Med Rehabil Clin N Am  1999; 
10(1): 77-94.
9.  Johnson JN, Gauvin J, Fredericson M. Swimming biomechanics and 
injury prevention. Physportsmed  2003; 31(1): 1-7.
10.  Kammer CS, Young CC, Niefeld MW . Swimming injuries and illnesses. 
Physportsmed  1999;  27(4): 51-60.
11.  McMaster WC. Swimming injuries. An overview. Sports Med  1996; 
22:332-6.
12.  McMaster W, Troup JP , Arredondo S. The incidence of shoulder problems 
in developing elite swimmers. J Swim Res  1989; 5(2): 11-6.
13.  Perry J. Anatomy and biomechanics of the shoulder in throwing, swim -
ming, gymnastics and tennis. Clin J Sport Med  1983, 2: 247-70.
14.  Pettrone F . Athletic Injuries of  the Shoulder.  New York: McGraw Hill, 
1995. 
15.  Richardson AR. The biomechanics of swimming: the knee and shoulder. 
Clin J Sport Med  1986; 5:103-13.
16.  Richardson AR, Jobe FW, Collins HR. The shoulder in competitive swim -
ming. Am J Sports Med  1980; 8:159-63.
17.  Thomas JT . The incidence of shoulder injuries in competitive swimmers 
in KwaZulu Natal. Honours thesis (Physiotherapy), University of Durban-
Westville, 2000, appendix  7:38-41.  
shoulder injuries.indd   12 3/13/06   2:40:26 PM
