ORIGINAL RESEARCH
PREVENTION AND TREATMENT OF
SWIMMER’S SHOULDER
Brian J. Tovin, D PT, MMSc, PT, SCS, ATC, FAAOMPTa
166ABSTRACT
Swimmer’s shoulder is a musculoskeletal
condition that results in symptoms in the area ofthe anterior lateral aspect of the shoulder, some-
times confined to the subacromial region.  The
onset of symptoms may be associated with
impaired posture, glenohumeral joint mobility,
neuromuscular control, or muscle performance.Additionally, training errors such as overuse, mis-
use, or abuse may also contribute to this condition.
In extreme cases, patients with swimmer’s shoul-der may have soft tissue pathology of the rotator
cuff, long head of the biceps, or glenoid labrum.
Physical therapists involved in the treatment ofcompetitive swimmers should focus on prevention
and early tr eatment, addr essing the impairments
associated with this condition, and analyzing train-ing methods and stroke mechanics. The purposeof this clinical comment ary is t o provide an
overview of the biomechanics of swimming, the
etiology of the clinical entity referred to as swim-mer’s shoulder, and strategies for injury preven-tion and treatment.
Key words. Swimmer’ s shoulder , injury preven-
tion, rotator cuff.INTRODUCTION
The shoulder complex is designed to achieve the
greatest range of motion (ROM) with the mostdegrees of freedom of any joint system in the body.
1
The excessive mobility of the shoulder at the gleno-
humeral and scapulothoracic joints is balanced by the
stability of the acromioclavicular (AC) and stern-
oclavicular joints.  At the glenohumeral joint, acomplex ligamentous system contributes to primary
stability and an elaborate musculotendinous system
serves as secondary stabilizers.  This support mecha-nism allows the shoulder to withstand large external
forces, while providing enough mobility for the upper
extremity to accomplish complex movement pat-terns.  
Perhaps the greatest illustration of the balance
between shoulder mobility and stability occurs dur-ing sports that r equir e overhead motions.  Many
overhead sports such as throwing, racket sports, and
volleyball r equir e two or thr ee ov erhead mov ement
patterns . Conv ersely, swimming r equir es sev eral
overhead mov ement patterns , involving continuous
humeral circumduction in clockwise and counter-clockwise dir ections.
2,3A competitiv e swimmer
usually e xceeds 4000 strokes for one shoulder in a
single workout, making this sport a common source
of shoulder pathology.   Shoulder pain is the most
common musculosk eletal complaint in swimming4-6
with reports of incidence of disabling shoulder pain
in competitive swimmers ranging from 27% to 87%.4-
12The purpose of this clinical commentary is to pro-
vide an overview of the biomechanics of swimming,
the etiology of the clinical entity referred to as swim-
mer’s shoulder , and str ategies f or injury prevention
and treatment.
SWIMMING BIOMECHANICS 
Swimming requires several different shoulder
motions, most being performed during circumduc-
tion in clockwise and counter-clockwise directionswith varying degrees of internal and external rotationand scapular protraction and retraction.
2Swimming
is comprised of f our differ ent str okes of varying dis-
NORTH AMERICAN JOURNAL OF SPORTS PHYSICAL THERAPY   |   NOVEMBER 2006   |   VOLUME 1, NUMBER 4aThe Sports Rehabilitation Center
Atlanta, Georgia 
starts in full flexion with internal rotation.  However, the
elbow s remain flexed during the pull-through until the
humerus is fully adducted and brought into horizontal
adduction with forearms touching each other.  Unlike theother strokes, the hands never move below the hips sothe tensile forces on the rotator cuff that occurs during
the other strokes at the end of pull-thorough does not
occur during breaststroke.
2
ETIOLOGY OF SWIMMER’S SHOULDER
Most musculoskeletal conditions can be divided into
macrotrauma and microtrauma based on the onset.14A
condition with sudden onset that occurs due to one spe-cific incident usually is referred to as macrotrauma.
14
Macrotrauma results from external forces and patients
usually present with tissue pathology that causes associ-ated impairments such as loss of motion, strength, and
proprioception.  Swimmer’s shoulder is a condition with
a gradual onset due to repetitive activity and can be clas-
sified as microtrauma.  Unlike macrotrauma, the etiologyof microtrauma is multifactorial and may be due to intrin-
sic factors or extrinsic factors.  
Intrinsic F actors
Swimmer’s shoulder usually presents as subacromial
impingement involving the rotator cuff tendon, bicipital
tendon, or subacr omial bur sa.15Primary subacr omial
impingement involves compression of these structuresbetween the acromion and greater tuberosity.
16The
cause of primary impingement is usually a tight posteri-or capsule (causing the humeral head to migrateanteriorly) or abnormal acr omial morphology.   How ever,
primary impingement syndrome is less common in com-
petitive swimmers than secondary impingement.
The mechanism of secondary impingement occurs
through a series of impairments, usually initiating in a
swimmer with increased anterior glenohumeral laxity.
10,15
Shoulder R OM in swimmers is similar to that of overhead
athletes, with excessive external rotation and limitedinternal rotation.  This shift in ROM towards increased
external r otation is an adjustment t o the demands on the
glenohumeral joint which goes through approximately
4,000 str okes daily.
15The acquir ed anterior laxity permits
excessive external rotation, but places greater demand on
the rotator cuff and the long head of the biceps to reduce
humeral head elevation and anterior translation.  
Failure of the rotator cuff and the scapular stabilizers to
maintain the humeral head in the glenoid fossa can leadto excessiv e humer al head migr ation and either incr eased
167tances, including freestyle (sometimes referred to as
the crawl), butterfly, backstroke, and breastroke.  Moststrokes are divided into two primary phases referred toas the pull-through and recovery.  The pull-through is
where propulsion is achieved and is further divided into
different phases consisting of the hand entry, the catch,mid-pull, and finish or end pull-through. This sectionwill provide an overview of swimming mechanics foreach stroke related to the shoulder.  For more detailed
analysis of swimming biomechanics, the reader isreferred to other sources.
13
Freestyle requires a combined motion of scapular
retraction and elevation, with humeral abduction and
external rotation during the recovery.2During the pull-
through phase, the scapula is protracted while thehumerus is adducted, e xtended, and internally rotated.
Stroke power is achieved through the shoulder adduc-tors, extenders, and internal rotators with the serratus
anterior and latissumus dorsi being the key propulsion
muscles for swimmers.
2Because the trunk is rotated
away from the side that is beginning to pull, the shoul-der avoids a true impingement position of forwardflexion with internal rotation and horizontal adduction. 
The 
butterfly has a similar motion at the shoulder as
freestyle, but the stresses are different because botharms ar e mov ed through the same motion simultane-
ously rather than alternating.  For this reason, no trunkrotation occurs so the demand of the medial scapular
stabiliz ers and r etractors during recovery is greater with
butterfly than fr eestyle .
2In addition, the humer al head
moves into an impingement position of elevation, hori-zontal adduction, and internal rotation at hand entry.
Much of the propulsion during the butterfly comes
from the hips and trunk so inefficiency of these muscle
groups can lead to increased stress on the shoulders. 
The motion at the shoulder during the 
backstroke is
opposite to the freestyle stroke with the shoulder inretraction, horiz ontal abduction, and e xternal r otation
at hand entry and the beginning of pull-through.  This
position places increased stress on the anterior capsule.
The arm position during the r ecovery is differ ent than
freestyle because the elbow is extended (rather than
flexed).  Due to trunk rotation, the swimmer is rarely
flat on the back during the movement, spending more
time on the side. Movement at the shoulder during 
breaststroke can vary,
with mor e motion occurring below the surf ace of the
water than any other stroke.  Like the butterfly, the
arms ar e mov ed simult aneously through a motion that
NOR TH AMERICAN JOURNAL OF SPOR TS PHYSICAL THERAPY   |   NOVEMBER 2006   |   VOLUME 1, NUMBER 4
tensile stress on the tendons 10, 15or compression of the
tendons fr om abutment of the humeral head on the
undersurface of the acromian.15The proposed mecha-
nism of f ailure initiates with muscle fatigue.  For example,
the serratus anterior in the healthy shoulder stabilizes thescapula in upward rotation and protraction, creating ade-
quate subacromial space for the biceps tendon and
rotator cuff and maintaining good approximation between
the humeral head and the glenoid fossa.  During thepulling motion of swimming, the serratus anterior effec-tively reverses origin and insertion to propel the body
over the arm, while maintaining the subacromial space
and glenohumeral joint congruency. When the serratus
anterior becomes fatigued, the scapula fails to protract
and upwardly rotate and the subacromial space may becompromised.  Additionally, the space between the
humeral head and glenoid increases, contributing to more
laxity.  
Symptoms that develop as a result of fatigue can also
affect stroke mechanics.  Research has documentedchanges in muscle activity that occurs in swimmers with
painful shoulders compared to swimmers with healthy
shoulders.
6Many swimmers will inherently adjust their
stroke to avoid painful movement patterns.17For exam-
ple, during early pull-thr ough, the hand usually enters the
water close to the midline with the elbow above the sur-
face of the w ater.   The upper e xtremity then continues t o
“reach” f orward below the surf ace of the w ater towards
the midline of the body.  In swimmer s with painful shoul -
ders, the hand enters further away from the midline withthe elbow dr opped closer to the surface of the water.   This
change is usually made t o avoid an impingement position
of full elevation with internal rotation and horizontal
adduction.  Another adjustment occur s at the end of the
pull-thr ough phase, when the hand should be close to the
thigh with internal rotation of the shoulder. In swimmers
with painful shoulders, the shoulder was externally rotat-
ed and the pull-through phase was shortened to avoidimpingement.
Another proposed impingement mechanism involves the
microvasculature of the rotator cuff.  Studies indicate that
when the shoulder is abducted, the vessels of thesupraspinatus and long head of the biceps ar e filled.
18
Conversely, when the arm is adducted and at the side, the
vascular system to these tendons is compromised.  This
phenomenon is referred to as a “wringing out” of thetendon, causing a temporary avascular zone 1 cm
proximal to the insertion on the humeral head.  Thisresponse also occurs when the humerus is adducted andflexed, a position that occurs with faulty mechanics or
muscle f atigue.
Extrinsic F actors
In addition to identifying the impairments that may have
contributed to swimmer’s shoulder, the clinician must
determine if the microtrauma is due to overuse, misuse,
abuse, or disuse.   Overuse in sports is performing a task
with a frequency that does not allow the tissues to recov-er and symptoms may be due to lack of muscle strengthor endurance.  An example of overuse would be a swim-
mer increasing her yardage in a swim workout from 5000
yards to 10,000 yards per day.  
Misuse is using improper
form or equipment, which may put abnormal stress on
the tissue structures.  An example of misuse is a swimmerusing faulty stroke mechanics.  One common error is
inadequate or excessive body roll during freestyle.  A
swimmer with excessive body roll may cross the midlineof the body during the pull through phase and this
increased horizontal adduction can lead to impingement.
2
Lack of body roll will also cause the humerus to compen-
sate by moving into further horizontal adduction for
adequate pr opulsion.  Abuse is having e xcessiv e force
going though normal tissues.  An example of abuse is aswimmer who trains excessively with hand paddles,increasing str ain on the shoulder .  
Disuse occur s when a
swimmer has taken a period of time off without trainingresulting in atrophy or altered neuromuscular control ofthe stabilizing shoulder girdle musculature.  In all of thesecases, the tissues cannot accommodate the repetitiveness,
force, or str ess that is encountered with a specific
activity.  
PRESEASON AND CLINICAL ASSESSMENT
Overview
This section will discuss key points when assessing a
swimmer during a preseason physical or during the sea-son when symptoms are present.  Some individuals may
be pr edisposed t o swimmer’ s shoulder if they hav e mus-
culoskeletal impairments or engage in improper training
methods .   A pr eseason evaluation should screen for these
impairments in a similar manner as a physical evaluation
used for a swimmer with symptoms.  In both cases, the
goal is to determine if impairments exist that could leador have led to swimmer’s shoulder. The reader is referred
to other sources for a comprehensive orthopedic shoulderassessment.
19
During a clinical examination, information is collected in
the subjective and objective assessment to determine a
168 NOR TH AMERICAN JOURNAL OF SPOR TS PHYSICAL THERAPY   |   NOVEMBER 2006   |   VOLUME 1, NUMBER 4
potential cause and effect r elationship between the tissue
pathology and presenting impairments.  This information
may be used to set up a preventative training program orguide treatment.  The exact impairments that may pre-dispose a swimmer to symptoms or tissue pathology are
not fully understood as no research has studied impair-
ments in asymptomatic swimmers to determine whichimpairments were most likely to lead to swimmer’s shoul-
der.   Most of the preventative programs are based on
addressing impairments that occur as a result of develop-
ing swimmer’s shoulder.
In swimmers who have already developed symptoms, the
primary complaint is usually pain in the subacromial
region.   These symptoms may be associated with an
inflammatory condition such as tendonitis, bursitis, cap-
sulitis , or arthritis and may be labeled as impingement
syndrome.   While diagnosis of these symptoms and tis-sue pathology may guide medical treatment of eitherpharmacological interv ention with or al medication or
injections, this treatment may not address the causative
factors.   Physical therapists should focus on the impair-
ments that are associated with the onset of symptomsincluding glenouhumeral hypermobility or instability,impair ed postur e, impaired rotator cuff strength, altered
scapulohumeral rhythm or poor neuromuscular control,or a tight posterior capsule.  Like most microtraumatic
conditions , swimmer s can usually not single out a specif -
ic event so the physical ther apist has t o discern which of
these impairments or training errors may have
contributed t o the condition or injury.   The subjectiv e
assessment may help identify the contributing impair-ments while the physical examination can focus onspecific tests and measures to confirm this information.
Subjective Assessment
The subjectiv e examination also provides information
about the area, symptom description, and behavior of thesymptoms in patients with swimmer’s shoulder.  This
information may help the clinician identify potential
sources of the symptoms. For example, a patient whopoints with one finger t o the anterior later al aspect of the
shoulder and describes a sharp pain with overhead move-
ments may have involvement of the subacromial regionor AC joint.  The physical examination would need to
focus on these areas. Conversely, a patient who presentswith diffuse pain throughout the shoulder and upper
extremity and describes burning, shooting pains may
need t o hav e a det ailed ev aluation of the cervical spine t o
rule out spinal pathology.  Other subjective information may help the physical
therapist determine the appropriate amount of testingperformed during the physical examination.  Theclinician should determine the lev el of irritability of a con-
dition during the subjective examination.  Irritability is
characterized by three parameters: pain level, what it
takes to provoke the symptoms, and the latency or time ittakes the symptoms to resolve after provocation.  A high-
ly irritable condition is determined by all three factors.For example, a patient who reports symptoms with a 7/10
pain level that are brought on with lifting the arm above
90 degrees without a load and the symptoms last for sev-
eral hours, has a highly irritable condition. Conversely, apatient who reports symptoms with a 5/10 pain level thatcomes on with lifting 200 lbs on a bench pr ess, and last
only for a few seconds has low irritability.  
In swimmer s, low-level shoulder pain that only occurs
after heavy training and resolves quickly is low irritabili-
ty.  A swimmer who has high-lev el shoulder pain during
swimming and following training for the remainder of theday has high irritability. The rehabilitation specialist mustbe cautious during the physical examination of a patientwith high irritability because once the symptoms are pro-voked, results from the remaining tests and measuresmay be unclear .
One key element in the history is assessing the training
program and methods of the swimmer .  The physical ther-
apist should determine the number of yards or metersperformed in each workout, the number of workouts perweek, the dry-land pr ogram, and any r ecent changes in
training. 
Common Findings on Physical Examination
A pr eseason physical or clinical e xamination of a
swimmer with shoulder symptoms will screen for several
impairments .  Initial observ ation may r eveal common
postur al impairments related to the shoulder girdle.  A
common postural deviation observed with swimmers is a
forward head, rounded shoulder posture.  This posture is
a combination of upper quarter impairments includingincreased thoracic kyphosis, decreased cervical lordosis,
protracted scapulae, and internally rotated/anteriorhumer al head.
20,21Soft tissue findings associated with this
posture include restricted anterior shoulder musculature,
lengthened and w eak medial scapular stabilizers, tight
glenohumeral  posterior capsule, and weak anterior cervi-cal flexors.
22
169NORTH AMERICAN JOURNAL OF SPORTS PHYSICAL THERAPY   |   NOVEMBER 2006   |   VOLUME 1, NUMBER 4 
prevention of swimmer’s shoulder focuses on addressing
impairments and the training errors of overuse, misuse,
or abuse as described earlier in this chapter.  Achievingfunctional goals also requires knowledge of swimmingmechanics and training techniques, as well as the stress
placed on the shoulder during swimming.  This knowl-
edge will guide the physical therapist to choose exercisesthat place demands on the shoulder similar to those
encountered with a specific sport or position. 
Address Impairments
The first step in treating swimmer’s shoulder is to address
any related impairments.  Because the clinical presenta-tion usually involves pain related to inflammation, initialtreatments may use modalities and manual techniques,such as grade I or II mobilizations, to address pain.  As
pain r esolves, the physical therapist should prioritize the
problem list related to the symptoms.   Potential commonimpairments that need to be addressed include postural
deviations, tight anterior chest musculature, hypomobili-
ty of the thoracic spine, loss of joint mobility or excessivejoint mobility, tight posterior capsule , and impair ed
strength and endurance of the rotator cuff and scapularstabilizers.  
Posture
Postural impairments are managed through joint /soft
tissue mobiliz ation, fle xibility, and str engthening/st abi-
lization exercises of the scapular retractors and deep
cervical flexors.  Tight anterior shoulder musculatureincluding the pect oralis minor can be self stretched or
manually str etched.  Care must be taken to avoid over-
stretching the anterior capsule.  One method that allowsthe anterior chest to be stretched without overstressingthe anterior capsule is to apply a low load on the anterior
aspects of the shoulderusing cuff weights whilethe patient lies supine over
a bolster 
(Figur e 1).  This
position allows the scapu-lae t o retract over the
bolster so the stretch isconcentrated on the anteri-
or chest musculature.   
Joint Mobility
In swimmer’s shoulder,
posterior capsule tightness
may accompany anteriorshoulder laxity and shouldbe addressed by the physi-Physical e xamination of swimmer’s shoulder will usually
reveal alterations in active ROM of the shoulder, particu-
larly at the midrange or end range of elevation.Swimmers with impingement may have a painful arcfrom 60-120 degrees if the head of the humerus is not
maintained in the glenohumeral joint.
4,11,15Altered
scapulohumeral rhythm may be observed with excessiveelevation or upward rotation of the scapula. Kibler
23has
presented an assessment technique to measure lateralscapular slide, by measuring the distance between the
medial border of the scapula and the spine during eleva-tion.  Assessment of passive ROM will usually show
excessive external rotation and horizontal abduction dueto hypermobility of the anterior glenohumeral joint cap-sule.  These swimmers will usually have a sulcus sign, apositive load and shift, a positive relocation test, and may
have a positive apprehension sign.
5,7,10However, hyper-
mobility determined by these tests may be the result ofligamentous laxity.
7,10Hypermobility is not instability
unless the secondary stabilizers do not function
adequately and symptoms occur.  In swimmers withinstability, w eakness of the r otator cuff and scapular sta-
bilizers will be noted.   If these structures are inflamed,impingement tests will be positive and resisted tests may
be painful. 
If these provocation tests are positive, the clinician must
rule out sour ces of primary impingement such as abnor -
mal acr omial morphology (thr ough x-r ay) or a tight
posterior capsule.  In addition, if tissue pathology is sus-
pected by the physical ther apist based on the findings in
the physical examination, the swimmer may need to bereferred back to the physician for additional tests.Chronic swimmer’s shoulder can result in pathology ofthe r otator cuff, glenoid labrum, and long head of the
biceps. 
PRINCIPLES OF 
PREVENTION ANDTREATMENT
Introduction
The f oundation f or est ab-
lishing a prevention or
treatment plan for theswimmer’s shoulder is hav-
ing a clear understanding ofthe impairments, underly-
ing tissue pathologies , and
resultant functional limit a-
tions.  Treatment and
170NOR TH AMERICAN JOURNAL OF SPOR TS PHYSICAL THERAPY   |   NOVEMBER 2006   |   VOLUME 1, NUMBER 4
Figure 1. Anterior capsule stretch using cuff weights;
supine ov er bolster .
scapular stabilizers.  Research has
documented the effectiv eness of
different prone exercises for
recruiting the scapular stabilizers.24
Prone scapular stability exercises
are assessed by the ability to
recruit targeted muscles is posi-
tions that simulate swimming.  For
prone exercises, the clinicianshould instruct the patient tomaintain the scapula in retrac-
tion/depression while palpating
the upper trapezius to ensure no
compensation is occurring. 
Figures 4-11 illustrate some com-
mon prone table exercises used for
shoulder strengthening and scapu-lar stabilization.  The rowing
motion is accomplished with
humeral extension with elbowflexion 
(Figure 4) .  For prone
extension, the patient extends the
shoulder with the elbow extendedand thumb facing away from thebody 
(Figur e 5).   For pr one hori-
zontal abduction, the patient
horiz ontally abducts the arm with
the elbow e xtended and either
neutr al rotation or external humer-
al rotation (Figure 6) .  During these
exercises, the clinician should
instruct the patient t o retract the
scapula prior to and during the
humer al motion.  The patient
should also know not t o advance
the humerus beyond the plane ofthe body, particularly if an injuryor postoperative condition war-rants protection of the anterior
capsule.  
Figure 7 is an example of
an exercise used in our clinic t o
recruit the lower trapezius. The
patient lies pr one with the
humerus abducted to 150 degreesand the elbow is flexed to 90
degrees.  The patient is instructed
to lift the hand off the table byexternally rotating the shoulder.  cal therapist.  Posterior capsule
mobiliz ations can be performed
with the patient in supine and the
shoulder blade supported in thescapular plane using a mobiliza-
tion wedge or folded towel.  The
clinician holds the arm in midrange abduction, applies a gentleglenohumeral distraction whileproviding a posterior glide to theproximal humerus 
(Figure 2) .  A
self stretch to the posterior cap-sule can also be applied by lyingon the involved side with theshoulder flexed to 90 degrees.The patient applies a self stretch
by applying a downward force to
the distal forearm towards theplinth 
(Figure 3) .  
Scapular Stabilization
Scapular stability and proper
scapulohumor al rhythm is an
essential element of shoulderrehabilitation and prevention.Scapular position dir ectly affects
humeral head position and deter-mines the length tension relation-ship for the rotator cuff as thesemuscles originate on the scapu-
la.
23An unst able scapula or f aulty
movement patterns can change
the demands on the rotator cuffmuscles, potentially leading tomicrotrauma injuries.    The phys-
ical therapist should assess the
muscles essential to scapular sta-bility such as the middle andlower trapezius , serr atus anterior,
and rhomboids.  Scapular position
and impr oper mov ement patterns
are treated with a combination of
soft tissue release and neuromus-
cular re-education to inhibitoveractive, dominant muscles and
facilitate weak, inhibited muscles. 
Rehabilitation and prevention of
swimmer’s shoulder shouldincorporate neuromuscular reed-
ucation and str engthening of the
171 NOR TH AMERICAN JOURNAL OF SPOR TS PHYSICAL THERAPY   |   NOVEMBER 2006   |   VOLUME 1, NUMBER 4
Figur e 3. Self str etch of posterior capsule .
Figur e 2. Posterior guide to humerus (pos-
terior bolster).
Figur e 4. Rowing in prone.
Figure 5. Prone extension.
Figure 6. Prone horizontal abduction 
172NOR TH AMERICAN JOURNAL OF SPOR TS PHYSICAL THERAPY   |   NOVEMBER 2006   |   VOLUME 1, NUMBER 4
Figure 7. Recruitment of the lower trapez-
ius. Lift the hand off the table by externally
rotating the shoulder.
Figure 8. “Superman.”
Figur e 9. “TYI Exercises .” T: Prone on mat.
Retract scapulae with arms abducted to 90
degrees and humerus in horizontal abduc-
tion.
Figur e 10. “TYI Exercises.” Y: Shoulders
externally rotate with elbow flexed to 90
degrees.
Figure 11. “TYI Exercises.” I: Shoulders in full
bilateral elevation with elbow extension.
Figure 12. Protraction of scapula.
Figure 13. Prone, supported on
elbows.
Figur e 14. Quadruped position.
Figure 15. Push up position.
Figur e 16. Push up position; legs
elevated in chair. 
Figures 8 though 11 represent bilateral scapular stabiliza-
tion e xercises.  “Supermans” are performed in prone
with the elbows in full extension and the shoulders exter-
nally rotated at the sides of the body (Figure 8) .  The
patient is instructed to retract the scapulae and lift the
hands and arms off the table.  Figure 9 is the first in a pro-
gressive sequence of three exercises that we refer to as
TYI exercises because of the patterns
formed.  The patient retracts the
scapulae with the arms abducted to 90degrees and moves the humerus into
horizontal abduction forming a “T” .  Asthe patient advances, the shoulders
are externally rotated with the elbowsflexed to 90 degrees, forming a “Y”
(Figure 10) .  The final exercise requires
the patient to move into a position of
full bilateral elevation with elbow
extension, forming an “I” (Figure 11) .  
Scapular protraction and stabilization
in the protracted position are trainedthrough a series of exercises, startingwith a supine punch.  The patient ispositioned supine with the arm heldin 90 degrees flexion with full elbowextension and maint ained in the
scapular plane.  During the move-
ment, the patient is told to move the
hand towards the ceiling, by protract-ing the scapula.  Manual resistance or
weights can be added t o this motion as
the patient advances 
(Figure 12) . These
exercises may also be used in con-junction with weight bearing exercis-es.  
Weight bearing exercises for scapular
stabilization are illustrated in figures
13-19.    Exercises are advanced fromprone on elbows 
(Figure 13) to
quadruped (Figure 14) to a push up
position (Figur e 15).  As the patient
improves, the lower extremities can
be elev ated to increase resistance
(Figure 16) .  A dynamic component can be added to high-
er level athletes who demonstrate good control with the
preceding exercises.  These patients can perform these
exercises with the upper extremities on a wobble board
(Figure 17) ,“walk-outs” with their upper extremities with
the lower quarter on a gym ball (Figure 18) , or “step-overs” using the upper extremities to “walk” up and
down ov er a foot stool (Figur e 19).  A slide boar d is also
an excellent device to use for dynamic upper extremity
stabilization.  Patients can be progressed from perform-ing horizontal abduction and adduction on their knees
and eventually on their toes.  For these exercises,patients are instructed to maintain scapular protraction
during the activity to strengthen the ser-
ratus anterior. 
Rotator Cuff Strength
Strengthening exercises for the rotator
cuff are progressed based on the present-
ing condition and the ability of thepatient.  The range of rotator cuffstrengthening exercises may includeisometric, concentric, eccentric, and
plyometric activities.  As healing allows,
shoulder strengthening is initiated withisometric exercises including rhythmicstabiliz ation drills , which ar e exercises to
challenge a patient t o maintain the upper
extremity in a variety of positions while
the rehabilit ation specialist challenges the
position with manual resistance.  Theexercise selection should be based on posi-tions that do not overstress the healingtissues. This activity helps restore propri-oceptiv e feedback t o the centr al nerv ous
system thr ough mechanoreceptors of the
shoulder girdle and prepares the shoulder
for isotonic strengthening.  
Isotonic strengthening of the rotator cuff
can be accomplished with different typesof resistance in different positions.
Resistance can be applied manually, with
resistive bands, or with weights. The
advantage of using manual resistance isthat the ther apist can v ary the r esistance
to accommodate the output from the
patient.  The adv antage of using resistive
bands is that the patient can performfunctional movement patterns against
resistance.  However, these forms of resistance do not
allow a clinician to quantify the amount of resistance,
which is the advantage of using weights.  When choosinga position for rotator cuff strengthening, the rehabilita-
tion specialist should hav e a goal f or the e xercise.  If the
goal is to stabilize the scapula, exercising in supine may
173NORTH AMERICAN JOURNAL OF SPORTS PHYSICAL THERAPY   |   NOVEMBER 2006   |   VOLUME 1, NUMBER 4
Figure 17. Push up position; hands
placed on wobble board.
Figure 18. “Walk-outs.”
Figure 19. “Step-overs.” 
be the best position because the scapula is fixed against
the table.  Patients can be progressed to a sidelying posi-
tion to work against gravity or in standing position to
simulate functional mov ement patterns.  Patients should
be encouraged to exercise in the scapular plane and theposition of humeral abduction can advance to reproduce
the position the arm is in during a specific sport.  
Rotator cuff exercises are performed and advanced based
on the available ROM.   Due to the importance of the
eccentric component of the rotator cuff in overhead
sports, this mode of exercise should be integrated intothe rehabilitation program, particularly for external rota-tion. The infraspinatus and teres minor contract to
stabilize the humeral head by maintaining a posterior
pull to counter any anterior translatory forces.  
Address Training Errors
Overuse is a classic training error that occurs in swim-
ming as athletes typically train 10-12 hours per week in
the water in addition to dry-land training.  Swimmerscan average 10,000 yards per day of training. The high
level of repetitions, estimated at 4,000 strokes per side,
that occur during training sessions can cause fatigue,leading to the conditions discussed earlier.   Modificationof swim yar dage may need t o be emphasized if the
swimmer wants to prevent progression of an injury.
Abuse is another tr aining err or that can occur in swim -
ming, causing incr eased e xternal str ess on the shoulder.
The use of hand paddles increases stress on the upperextremity by increasing surface area and resistance to
movement.  Kickboards put the arm in position of full
elevation and internal rotation, leading to subacromial
joint compr ession.   U se of these devices should be omit-
ted or limited f or a swimmer returning from a shoulder
injury.
Misuse in swimming occurs if an individual has faulty
stroke mechanics.  An example of improper technique is
when the hand crosses the mid-line during the pull-
through phases of the fr eestyle str oke.  This motion is
common in swimmers who have excessive body roll and
can pr edispose them to impingement.   Optimal body
roll allows the arm to stay close to the plane of the scapu-la, thus reducing the stress of soft tissue structures in the
anterior shoulder region.
25Optimal body roll also allows
greater lengthening of the abdominal oblique muscles,shoulder adductors/medial rotators, and scapular retrac-tors so that at the beginning of the pull-through thesemuscles have a mechanical advantage.2Conversely, a
lack of adequate body r oll forces the recovering arm into
a greater range of shoulder extension, horizontal abduc-
tion, and medial r otation in order to clear the hand from
the water, causing encroachment of the subacromialspace. 
An important issue to consider when working with
swimmers is their reluctance to stay out of the water.
25
Although swimmers are involved in dry-land training,
no suitable substitute exists for swimming.  Modification
of training schedules and techniques allow the patient tocontinue swimming, enabling the physical therapist toestablish or maintain credibility with the swimmer.
15, 25
In extreme cases, the swimmer may need a short dry-
land period to allow for adequate soft tissue healing.  In
these cases, the rehabilitation specialist should educate
the swimmer so that the reason for the lay-off is under-stood.   Time spent out of the water should be kept as
short as possible, even if the swimmer is doing primari-
ly kicking activities.   Although returning to the watermay not be ideal for rehabilitation, keeping a swimmer
out of the water for a lengthy period may result in a reha-
bilitation program that is ignored. Activity modificationin swimming may consist of the following tasks:
• T emporarily reduce training distance and frequency.
• Alter tr aining patterns so that differ ent strokes are used
more frequently throughout the practice.  This alterationwill r educe the r epetitiv e pattern at the glenohumer al
and allow the muscles t o function differ ently.
• Avoid the use of hand paddles, kickboards, and surgi-
cal tubing.
• Use swim fins to enhance the propulsion from the legs
and r educe the str ess on the shoulder
SUMMAR Y
Swimmers shoulder is a condition that may be
prevented with adequate preseason screening that canidentify impairments and training errors that may lead
to symptoms.  If a swimmer does become symptomatic
during the season, the physical ther apist should identify
the most likely impairments or training errors and rule
out any significant tissue pathology that w ould warrant a
referral to an orthopedic surgeon.  A comprehensiverehabilitation program usually includes strengthening of
the rotator cuff and scapular stabilizers, stretching ante-
rior chest musculature that may be shortened, andimplementing activity modification so the athlete can
174NOR TH AMERICAN JOURNAL OF SPOR TS PHYSICAL THERAPY   |   NOVEMBER 2006   |   VOLUME 1, NUMBER 4
still participate in the sport.  Future research should
focus on determining if addressing specific impairments
prior to the season can reduce the incidence of swim-
mer’s shoulder and assessing which impairments are the
greatest risk factors.
REFERENCES
1.  Abelew T. Kinesiology of the shoulder. In: T ovin BJ. 
Evaluation and treatment of the shoulder: an integration of 
the guide to physical therapist practice . Philadelphia: FA 
Davis Co; 2001:25.
2.  Shapiro C. Swimming. In Shamus E, Shamus J (eds). 
Sports injury prevention and rehabilitation . New York: 
McGraw-Hill; 2001:103-154.
3.  Ciullo JV , Stevens GG. The prevention and treatment of 
injuries to the shoulder in swimming. Sports Med . 
1989;7:182-204.
4.  Bak K. Nontraumatic glenohumeral instability and 
coracoacromial impingement in swimmers. Scand J Med 
Sci Sports . 1996;6:132–144.
5.  Bak K, Faunø P . Clinical findings in competitive 
swimmers with shoulder pain. Am J Sports Med . 
1997;25:254–260.
6.  Bak K, Magnusson SP . Shoulder strength and range of 
motion in symptomatic and pain-free elite swimmers. 
Am J Sports Med . 1997;25:454–460.
7.  Beach ML, Whitney SL, Dickoff-Hoffman SA. Relationship 
of shoulder flexibility, strength and endurance to shoulder pain in competitive swimmers. 
J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 
1992;16:262–268.
8.  McMaster WC. Anterior glenoid labrum damage: a painful 
lesion in swimmer s. Am J Sports Med . 1986;14:383–387.
9.  McMaster WC, Troup J. A survey of interfering shoulder 
pain in United States competitive swimmers. Am J Sports 
Med. 1993;21:67–70.
10. McMaster WC, Roberts A, Stoddard T. A correlation 
between shoulder laxity and interfering pain in competitive swimmers. 
Am J Sports Med . 1998;26:83–87.
11. Richardson AB, Jobe FW, Collins HR. The shoulder in 
competitive swimming. Am J Sports Med . 1980;8:159–163.
12. Stocker D, Pink M, Jobe FW. Comparison of shoulder 
injury in collegiate-and master’s-level swimmers. 
Clin J  Sport Med . 1995;5:4–8.
13. Counsilman JE. The complete book of swimming, New 
York: Atheneum, 1977.
14. Johanson MA, Donatelli R, Greenfield BH. Rehabilitation 
of microtrauma injuries. In Greenfield BH (ed) 
Rehabilitation of the Knee: A Problem-Solving Approach . 
Philadelphia: FA. Davis Co; 1993:139-173.
15. Allegrucci M, Whitney SL, Irrgang JJ. Clinical 
implications of secondary impingement of the shoulder in freestyle swimmers. 
J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 1994; 
20:307–318.16. Neer CS. Impingement lesions. Clin Orthop. 
1983;173:70-77. 
17. Scovazzo ML, Browne A, Pink M et al. The painful 
shoulder during freestyle swimming. Am J Sports Med . 
1991; 19:577–582.
18. Rathbun JB, McNab I. The microvascular pattern of the 
rotator cuff. J Bone Joint Sur g. 1970; 52B:540-553.
19. Magee DJ.  Orthopedic Physical Assessment . 4thEd. 
Philadelphia: Saunders, 2002.
20. Rocabado M. Biomechanical relationship of the cranial, 
cervical, and hyoid regions. J Craniomandiular Pract . 
1983;11:3. 
21. Ayub E, Glasheen-Wray M, Kraus S. Head posture: a 
study of the effects on the rest postion of the mandible. 
J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 1984;5:179.
22. Janda V . Muscles, central nervous motor regulation and 
back problems. In Korr IM (ed). Neurobiologic Mechanisms 
in Manipulative Therapy . New York: Plenum; 1979.
23. Kibler B. The role of the scapula in athletic shoulder 
function. Am J Sports Med . 1998;26:325–339.
24. Mosely JB, Jobe FW, Pink M, Perry J, Tibone J. EMG 
analysis of the scapular muscles during a shoulder rehabilitation program. 
Am J Sports Med . 1992;20:128-134.
25. Murphy T C.  Shoulder injuries in swimming. In: Andr ews 
JR, Wilk KE (eds). The Athlete’s Shoulder ., New York: 
Churchill Livingstone;1994:411–424.
CORRESPONDENCE
Brian J. T ovin, DPT , MMMSc , PT, SCS, A TC, 
FAAOMPT
Clinic Director
The Sports R ehabilitation Center
555 10th StreetAtlanta, Georgia  30318
Phone: (404) 477-8888Fax: (404) 477-8889
Btovin@sportsrehabcenter.com
175NORTH AMERICAN JOURNAL OF SPORTS PHYSICAL THERAPY   |   NOVEMBER 2006   |   VOLUME 1, NUMBER 4 
