See discussions, st ats, and author pr ofiles f or this public ation at : https://www .researchgate.ne t/public ation/13067149
Open water swimming. Particular medical problems
Article    in  Clinics in Sports Medicine  · May 1999
Sour ce: PubMed
CITATIONS
15READS
3,257
1 author:
David F Gerr ard
Univ ersity of Ot ago
78 PUBLICA TIONS    2,491  CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
All c ontent f ollo wing this p age was uplo aded b y David F Gerr ard on 02 June 2014.
The user has r equest ed enhanc ement of the do wnlo aded file.
AQUATIC SPORTS INJURIES AND REHABILITATION 027&5919/99 $8.00 + .OO 
OPEN WATER SWIMMING 
Particular Medical Problems 
David F. Gerrard, MBChB, FACSP 
Open water swimming is a rapidly growing discipline within organized 
aquatic sport. Although endurance swimmers have been challenged by oceans, 
rivers, and lakes for many years, the real understanding of the science of the 
sport is a new phenomenon. Similarly, the clinical problems of long-distance 
swimming in environments, frequently inhospitable, are now recognized and 
managed more effectively. At all times, the health and safety of athletes remains 
a shared prime concern. 
By definition, open water swimming implies any event held outside the 
confines of a swimming pool. Over the past 30 years, there has been a prolifera- 
tion of such events in lakes, rivers, reservoirs, and on ocean courses, particularly 
in temperate countries where water temperatures are more welcoming. 
This article discusses the development of open water swimming as an 
international sport, describing its history, characteristics, and some factors that 
affect the performance of the open water swimmer. Particular emphasis will be 
placed on issues of special medical importance. 
The first of several formal competitions in open water swimming was surf 
lifesaving, a competitive activity common to New Zealand, Australia, the west 
coast of the United States, and South Africa. Surf races are held over distances 
ranging from 300 to 1000 m. Competitors run from the beach into the surf, swim 
clockwise around a row of eight buoys, anchored behind the surf break, and 
return directly to the beach where they finish by running between two flags. 
The advent of the triathlon in the early 1970s stimulated a rapid growth in the 
popularity of mass-participation, open water events for multisport competitions. 
These events have lead to an increased regard for the safety of participants and 
a greater understanding of the demands of open water swimming. The medical 
supervision of such events continues to challenge aquatic sports medicine ex- 
perts who must consider the safety of the athlete as their first priority. 
From the Medicine Department, School of Medicine, University of Otago, Dunedin, New 
Zealand 
CLINICS IN SPORTS MEDICINE 
VOLUME 18 * NUMBER 2 APRIL 1999 337 
338 GERRARD 
AN HISTORICAL SNAPSHOT 
The International Swimming Federation (FINA) has recognized open water 
swimming as an aquatic discipline since 1986. Although long distance, endur- 
ance swimming has been popular for many years, it was not until 1986 that 
FINA-sanctioned events were established, with the first long-distance swimming 
World Cup in Lake Windermer in England? In 1991 the first World Open Water 
Swimming Championships were held in Perth, Western Australia. Men and 
women representing over 25 countries competed in the 25-km race held on the 
Swan River. Under excellent stewardship and in good conditions, the event was 
without any significant medical mishap. The mens’ title was won by Chad 
Hundeby (USA), and Shelley Taylor-Smith (Australia) won the womens’ crown. 
Among the earliest in a number of long distance open water swimming 
events was the famous Catalina Channel swim in California. The inaugural race 
took place in January 1927, when a field of 101 swimmers braved the chilly 
waters of the 21-mile crossing from the California coast to the island of Catalina. 
All but one of the contestants, a 17-year-old Canadian named George Young, 
succumbed to the conditions, but this young man became the first to conquer 
the Catalina Channel. Since then, another 113 attempts have been successfu1.4 In 
the ensuing years, many other famous stretches of international water have been 
conquered by intrepid marathon swimmers. The Bering Strait, the Cape of Good 
Hope, the Straits of Magellan, and Lake Windermere are among the more 
interesting. 
But the event that epitomizes the lure of the open water is, undoubtedly, 
swimming the English Channel, a 20-mile body of water separating England 
from France. Of 4370 recorded attempts, by swimmers from throughout the 
world, 800 have failed? The formation of the Channel Swimming Association 
in 1927 occurred more than half a century after the English Channel was 
first swum. 
On August 23, 1875, Captain Matthew Webb entered the waters off Dover 
for what was to be a history-making swim of immense courage. Pushed west, 
then east by currents, Webb’s final course took him to a landing on the beach at 
Calais 21 hours and 40 minutes after leaving the English mainland. His effort, 
without special training, exercise science, sport nutrition, and modem naviga- 
tional technology, is still the standard by which many contemporary open water 
marathon swimmers set their goal. 
The legacy of Captain Matthew Webb is carried on in the remarkable feats 
of today’s marathon swimmers who have reduced the Channel swim time-to 
7 hours and 17 minutes for men by Chad Hundeby (USA), and 7 hours and 40 
minutes for women by Penny Lee Dean (USA). In 1987 Philip Rush (New 
Zealand) established an amazing record of 28 hours, 21 minutes, and 20 seconds 
for a triple nonstop Channel crossing. His time has remained unchallenged and 
was a mere 7 hours slower than Webb’s original one-way swim. During his 
triple crossing, Rush set five world’s best records for triple crossing, for any 
double crossing, for England to France, France to England, and England to 
France return. But the veritable title of Queen of the English Channel must go 
to Great Britain’s Alison Streeter, who, by the end of 1987, had swum the 
distance an incredible 36 times. The English Channel remains the ”Mount Ever- 
est” of open water swims. 
Today, there is a better understanding of the demands of the sport of 
open water swimming, as coaches and athletes prepare for the unforgiving 
environment of the open water swim arena. FINA has a designated Open Water 
Swimming Committee that administers this sport and collaborates closely with 
the FINA medical committee to ensure athlete safety. Challenges to the athletes 
OPEN WATER SWIMMING 339 
and physicians include musculoskeletal injury, physical and physiologic prepara- 
tion, environmental stressors, nutritional requirements, conditions of the skin 
and ears, and marine envenomation. 
MARINE ENVENOMATION 
The toxic effects of marine venoms from bites or stings range from localized 
pain and erythema, to allergic phenomena such as eczema and rhinitis, or 
more serious systemic anaphylactoid reactions.Io, 18, 2o Myocardial depression, 
pulmonary edema, and acute shock are uncommon but potentially fatal sequelae 
of the entry of marine toxin through the skin or mucosal surface of a swimmer. 
This is the process known as envenomation.2° 
Marine venoms, complex mixtures of polypeptides and enzymes, are pro- 
duced by a number of marine organisms found most commonly in tropical 
waters (i.e., where water temperatures exceed 25°C). These include the blue- 
ringed octopus, jellyfish species (especially the box jellyfish, mauve stingers, 
bluebottles, and the Portuguese "man-0-war "), spiny fish (including stingrays), 
and certain corals. The latter may invoke local reactions through cuts and 
abrasions. Open water swimmers may unwittingly swim into shoals of jellyfish 
during competition. This phenomenon is documented in Australian surf lifesav- 
ing competition. 
During marathon swimming events, the media focus is frequently on the 
use of cages to protect the swimmer from attack by sharks. Many authorities, 
however, agree that more preventive measures should be enforced to minimize 
the potential hazards of jellyfish and seasnakes, to which the shark cage is 
little deterrent.20 Contrary to popular belief, shark attacks during open water 
swimming competition are rare events4 
Marine Envenomation in the Athlete 
Should an open water swimmer be affected by marine envenomation during 
an event, he or she is likely to be aware that they have been stung, given that 
localized acute pain is a frequent associate. Clearly, the immediate management 
decision is to assess the extent of the trauma and to identify the marine organism 
responsible.18, 2o In all cases, it is important to communicate with the athlete in a 
firm but helpful manner to assess the potential for serious clinical c'onsequences. 
Support staff must then closely observe the swimmer for signs of inappropriate 
behavior or impending distress. 
Preventive Strategies 
By observing some simple precautions, the risks of open water swimmers 
being affected by marine envenomation can be reduced greatly. In the tropics it 
should be mandatory for athletes, coaches, and swim organizers to carefully 
survey the course or route. In addition, the local knowledge of fishermen, 
surfers, and other water users may prove very helpful. Should a swimmer be 
stung, each case of envenomation must be considered as potentially serious until 
the responsible marine animal has been identified, or the clinical status of the 
swimmer has been established accurately. 
340 GERRARD 
Table 1. COMMON TROPICAL MARINE ANIMALS, THEIR MODE OF AlTACK, 
AND CLINICAL SEQUELAE 
Common 
Marine Signs and Symptoms of 
Animals Means of Attack (Defense) Envenomation 
Jellyfish 
Box jellyfish 
(sea wasp) 
Portuguese 
man-0-war 
Pacific 
bluebottle 
Spiny fish 
Stingray Stonefish 
Sea snakes & 
octopuses 
Beaked sea 
snake 
B 1 u e - rin g e d 
octopus 
Corals Sting by nematocysts Localized pain and 
inflammation 
Brief symptoms in mild cases 
Severe cases: 
Nausea and vomiting 
Altered state of consciousness 
respiratory/cardiac arrest 
Sting by spines on body or tail Acute local pain and swelling 
Intensified pain at puncture site 
Risk of secondary infection if 
untreated 
Painless bite 
Myotoxicity-myalgia 
M yoglobinuria 
Neurotoxicity-para1 ysis Bite from sharp beak or mouth 
Cuts, abrasions, lacerations Acute stinging pain 
Local inflammation 
Pruritis Secondary infection Lymphadenopathy 
Datafrom Williamson JA Marine envenomation. In Fields KB, Fit& PA (eds): Medical Problems in 
Athletes. Malden, Massachusetts, Blackwell Science, 1997, p 305. 
Common Dangerous Marine Animals 
Following the studies of Williamson,2° and with reference to the marine life 
identified on the north eastern Australian coastline, a number of common organ- 
isms have been associated with swimming-related envenomation. Table 1 lists 
these, describes their modes of "attack," and identifies some of the sigruficant 
signs and symptoms. It is not however, within the scope of this article to discuss 
the appropriate therapeutic intervention for each scenario. 
HYPOTHERMIA 
Given the cooling effect of water, and the fact that many open water swims 
are held in some of the less temperate regions of the world, the risk of hypother- 
mia must be considered always. For swimmers from equatorial countries, the 
unaccustomed exposure to water considered tepid by most others may result in 
significant cold stress with an attendant spectrum of physiologic consequences. 
Acclimation to cold water may be achieved through a process of gradual, 
supervised adaptation. 
In classlfylng hypothermia, most contemporary authors acknowledge three 
grades-mild, moderate, and severe.2T4 With respect to the open water swimmer, 
OPEN WATER SWIMMING 341 
the factors that increase the risk of hypothermia include the temperature of the 
water, additional physical factors, such as wind chill, the ability of the swimmer 
to conserve body heat (somatotype and use of protective grease, a cap, or a 
body suit), the duration of exposure, and the state of stress (fatigue). Many open 
water events, particularly those in Europe, are swum in temperatures as low as 
13" or 14°C. The current FINA regulation (Open Water Swimming [OWS] 5.5)5 
recommends a minimum temperature of 14"C, adding that the water tempera- 
ture "should be checked on the day of the race, 2 hours before the start, in the 
middle of the course, at a depth of 40 cm." 
The Pathophysiology of Hypothermia 
For an athlete to become hypothermic there needs to be an ambient tempera- 
ture below that of the core body temperature (CBT). In addition, the ability to 
generate body heat (thermogenesis) must be less than the continuing body 
heat losses.1o Clearly, the aquatic environment has the potential to satisfy these 
prerequisites, and a fatigued open water swimmer may have impaired thermo- 
genesis, with increased heat loss chiefly through conduction and convection. 
The physiologic balance then swings strongly toward a critical fall in CBT, often 
with disastrous consequences. Butcher and GambrelP list exhaustive exercise, 
cold water immersion, and windchill as three of the risk factors for accidental 
hypothermia. Open water swimming frequently extends an invitation to each. 
The Clinical Presentation of Hypothermia 
Accepting the definition of hypothermia as a CBT below 35"C, the further 
Mild hypothermia-CBT 32" to 35°C 
Moderate hypothermia-CBT 28" to 32°C 
Severe hypothermia-CBT<2S0C 
In the mildly hypothermic swimmer, few, if any, symptoms may be identifi- 
able. There are a number of physiologic signs, including tachycardia, peripheral 
vasoconstriction, and increased shivering, which represent the body's attempt to 
stimulate thermogenesis and minimize heat loss. In the aquatic-environment, 
however, these signs are unlikely to be noticed. 
Perhaps the first indication of impending thermal distress occurs when the 
CBT of the swimmer drops below 32°C. Uncharacteristic behaviors, such as 
swimming off course or not responding to signals from support craft, are signs 
of altered cognition. If unnoticed and allowed to continue, these manifestations 
of deteriorating central nervous system function may rapidly progress to altered 
consciousness, weakness, apathy, stupor, and even coma. These signs are the 
direct result of reduced cardiac output, the consequence of hypotension and 
profound bradycardia leading to a diminution in cerebral circulation and renal 
perfusion. At temperatures of about 32"C, there is also an additional risk of 
cardiac arrhythmia. Quite clearly the aquatic athlete, compared with his or her 
terrestrial counterpart, is at risk of death from drowning even when the stage of 
moderate hypothermia is reached. 
Severe hypothermia represents a critical stage for the open water swimmer. 
At a CBT of less than 28"C, loss of consciousness can be expected.1° Irrespective subdivision is proposed (Table 2): 
342 GERRARD 
Table 2. STAGES OF HYPOTHERMIA WITH ASSOCIATED CLINICAL FEATURES IN 
THE OPEN-WATER SWIMMER 
Degree of 
Hypothermia CBT (“C) Signs in Swimmer 
Severe Mild 32-35 Few if any: 
Shivering 
Subjective awareness of cold 
Apathy 
Disorientation (eg., swimming off course) 
Increasing confusion 
Altered conscious level 
Stupor 
Coma 
Loss of consciousness 
Coma 
Respiratory depression 
Myocardial irritability: Ventricular arrhythmias 
Cardiac arrest 
Death Moderate 28-32 Unusual behaviors: 
<28 Profound central changes: 
Datafrom Butcher JD, Gambrel1 RC Hypothermia. In Fields KB, Fitch PA (eds): Medical Problems 
in Athletes. Malden, MA, Blackwell Science, 1997, pp 285-292; and Kellett JJ: Medical considerations in 
aquatic sports. In Bloomfield, Fricker PA, Fitch K (eds): Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, 
ed 2. Melbourne, Blackwell Science, 1995, pp 576-589. 
of this, serious cardiac arrhythmias are common because myocardial irritability 
increases with dropping CBT. There is also anecdotal evidence of fatal ventricu- 
lar arrhythmias being precipitated by the physical manipulation of the pro- 
foundly hypothermic patient. These events are consequent upon slowed myocar- 
dial conduction and the establishment of re-entrant phenomena. For the 
distressed open water swimmer, this poses a very serious problem. In conditions 
of environmental challenge, and in the presence of exhaustive exercise, vigilant 
support staff must be alert to the early signs of hypothermia that precede the 
profound, life-threatening stages of myocardial dysfunction. 
A widely accepted treatment algorithm for managing hypothermia has been 
produced by the American Heart Association? It presents a protocol based on 
the degree of hypothermia and the individual patient response. Passive rewarm- 
ing strategies include means by which further body heat loss to conduction and 
convection are minimized. Such obvious things as the removal of the swimmer 
from the water, protection from the windchill, and the use of warm, dry insula- 
tion or “buddy warming” are simple yet very effective means. Should there be 
further concern for the swimmer, speedy evacuation for appropriate treatment 
is mandatory. Rewarming by active means requires experienced supervision and 
may take the form of external applications such as hot packs, radiant heat lamps, 
or warm baths. Internal rewarming may involve warmed oral or intravenous 
fluids or more advanced extracorporeal blood rewarming techniques in the 
severely hypothermic patient. 
Of clinical concern in any rewarming procedure is the potential for CBT 
“afterdrop,” the phenomenon of worsening hypothermia in the presence of 
appropriate rewarming techniques. This is considered to be caused by the 
continued conductive and convective heat losses, as warm blood from core 
OPEN WATER SWIMMING 343 
tissues is cooled by that from the cold peripheries. Afterdrop may cause a 
worsening of the swimmer’s condition despite vigorous resuscitative efforts. 
Given the increase in myocardial irritability and the attendant risks of ventricular 
arrhythmia and cardiac arrest, the indications for cardiopulmonary resuscitation 
must apply at all times during the management of the hypothermic patient? 
Musculoskeletal Injuries 
Competitive swimming of any nature carries the risk of musculoskeletal 
injury, which is the recognized consequence of repetitious biomechanical 
overuse.6,15 The shoulder is the commonly accepted site for swimming injury, 
followed by the knee and lower back.I5 
Shoulder Pain in Open Water Swimmers 
The incidence of shoulder pain in all swimmers ranges from 40% to 80%:. 
7,11,1p16 The pathogenesis may vary from impingement of soft tissue structures 
beneath the coracoacromial arch, to frank rotator cuff (supraspinatus) tendinitis, 
or irritation of the tendon of the long head of biceps. In addition, multidirec- 
tional, glenohumeral instability may be a complicating feature7, and the likely 
origin of chronic, exercise-related shoulder pain in the open water swimmer. 
Given the well-described biomechanics of the freestyle swimming action, it 
is easy to understand the genesis of shoulder pathology. During the phase of 
hand entry and at again at arm recovery, there is compression on the rotator 
cuff muscles impinged by the overhanging constraints of the coracoacromial 
arch. This well-described mechanism causes a ”wringing out” effect on the 
proximal supraspinatus tendon with its already compromised blood supply.’7 
Frank avascularity of both the supraspinatus and biceps tendons eventually 
follows, and this is thought to lay the foundation for degenerative changes in an 
area of tendon “watershed”, a phenomenon well described by early investigators 
including Rathbun and Ma~Nab,’~ Kennedy and Hawkins,” and Richardson 
et al.19 
Shoulder symptoms may advance progressively through phases of exercise- 
related pain, postexercise pain, disruptive persisting pain, and chronic recalci- 
trant pain that prevent further swimrning.l4, l5 
The accurate diagnosis of shoulder pain in swimmers is made by a process 
of clinical elimination beginning with the most commonly suspected etiology. 
Routinely, clinicians use plain radiology to rule out skeletal abnormalities includ- 
ing ”beaking” of the acromion, ultrasound to visualize the real-time action of the 
rotator cuff tendons, and MR imaging to obtain a more accurate determination of 
the anatomic relationships about the shoulder. 
Treatment begins with an accurate diagnosis and follows the accepted 
regime of conservative management, biomechanical correction, physical and 
medical therapy, and ultimate return to activity. Current surgical alternatives are 
widely accepted but also are recognized as the last lines of treatment. It is not 
the intention to provide further detailed discussion on the choices of treatment. 
The Knee and Lower Back in Swimmers 
The knee of the swimmer is frequently stressed as a consequence of the 
kicking action. This is a recognized associate of the breaststroke kick where 
344 GERRARD 
rotational forces, combined with the torque generated in the "whip kick" action, 
stress the medial joint compartment. Medial collateral ligament irritation is 
reported in addition to the frequent involvement of the pes anserinus, either 
through a mechanism of repeated traction or frank anserinal bursitis. Few open 
water swimmers spend time on breaststroke kicking, but it is worth reporting 
that the so-called breaststrokers' knee appears frequently in the sports medicine 
literature. So, too, is the well-documented patellofemoral compartment syn- 
drome recognized in many aquatic athletes as a consequence of altered knee 
biomechanics. In particular, an increased Q angle, with hypermobility of the 
typically small, high riding, patella alta is of clinical ~ignificance.'~ 
In a similar vein, repetitious hyperextension of the lumbosacral spine from 
swimming the butterfly stroke may precipitate a chronic lower back ache.I4 This 
is thought of as having its genesis in the mechanism of the butterfly swimming 
action that accentuates the lumbar lordosis and is possibly more provocative in 
the immature spine where there may be coexistent osteochondritis. 
MISCELLANEOUS MEDICAL CONDITIONS 
Skin Problems in Open Water Swimmers 
Chronic exposure to sunlight and water may precipitate a number of dis- 
crete skin problems in open water  swimmer^.'^ 
Sunburn is perhaps the most common environmental skin problem in any 
group of athletes constantly exposed to ultraviolet light (UVL) radiation. Acute 
exposure manifests as sunburning in susceptible fair-skinned individuals, 
whereas prolonged UVL exposure is linked to thickening of the skin, loss of 
elasticity, and an increase in the incidence of serious skin cancers. Basal cell 
carcinoma and malignant melanoma are the two most common forms. The use 
of wide spectrum sun blocks is advocated for long or frequent periods of sun 
exposure. 
Photodermatitis represents a spectrum of sun-related skin responses that 
may be precipitated by coincidental ingestion of a number of different drugs. 
Medications such as tetracvcline. eriseofulvin. sulfonamides. some oral diabetic I" agents, and certain cosmetics or perfumes may hypersensitize some individuals 
to UVL. 
Chronic fungal infections of the skin also may pose a problem to swimmers 
whose warm, moist skin surfaces provide a welcome environment for the tricho- 
phyton species.I3 This group of fungi is responsible for tinea pedis ("athletes 
foot"), tinea cruris ("jock itch), and tinea corporis. A range of topical antifungal 
agents is available to treat these conditions. However, the more recalcitrant 
conditions and those involving nail bed infection (onychomycosis) require longer 
term systemic treatment with one of the available oral antifungals. However, 
there is no substitute for education. All athletes should be aware of the potential 
for infectious diseases, particularly those spread through ignorance or neglect of 
personal hygiene. Another skin condition spread through communal showers 
and the sharing of footwear is the common verruca. These painful plantar warts 
can spread through the hyperkeratotic dermal layer of the foot and become 
difficult to eradicate. Destructive topical applications of podophyllin paint or 
liquid nitrogen are frequently necessary to eradicate the wart virus. 
Recurrent exposure to cold water also may precipitate a number of skin 
conditions, including Raynaud's phenomenon, chilblains, and urticaria in those 
with a specific tendency. Similarly, in warmer waters, an annoying pruritic 
OPEN WATER SWIMMING 345 
dermatitis (”seabathers’ eruption”) has been described in ocean swimmers.* 
Larvae of the phylum Cnidaria have been implicated as the causative organism. 
The Ear in Open Water Swimming 
The most common ear afflictions in swimmers are otitis externa, exostoses 
of the external auditory canal, and otitis media, which is frequently associated 
with upper respiratory tract infection (URTI). 
Otitis externa (“swimmers’ ear”) is an infection of the external ear canal 
commonly seen in swimmers whose frequent exposure to water encourages the 
growth of organisms, including Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Proteus sp. The 
fungus species Aspergillus also may be implicated. The swimmer complains of 
pain and itch in the outer ear. In chronic conditions there also may be an 
accompanying purulent discharge.12 A topical combination of antibiotic and 
corticosteroid is frequently necessary to treat this condition, in association with 
the local application of a drying agent between swimming sessions. Such topical 
applications usually contain a mixture of isopropyl alcohol and glacial acetic 
acid. 
Frequent exposure to cold water provides a stimulus for the development 
of exostoses in the external ear canals of open water swimmers. These small 
bony outcrops diminish the lumen of the external canal, causing water to become 
trapped, local skin to become irritated, and local infection to become established. 
The use of ear plugs and the wearing of bathing caps are simple prophylactic 
measures. A specialist’s opinion should be sought for any painful, chronic 
ear problem. 
DEHYDRATION 
Any event involving prolonged physical activity carries the potential for 
dehydration. Levels of fluid loss as low as 2% of body mass can affect both 
mental and physical function.’ 
Despite being immersed in an aquatic environment, open water swimmers 
are still exposed to the risk of fluid loss and potential dehydration. Endurance 
swimmers are mindful of the need to establish regular breaks for the replen- 
ishment of food and fluids. During long swims, techniques have been evolved 
to enable athletes to take frequent drinks and solid food from ’their support 
team. There are established procedures governing the permissible contact be- 
tween swimmer and handler, and ”feeding” from accompanying craft often 
entails bottled liquids or processed foods. Drink bottles and food on ”paddles” 
are common techniques that comply with these reg~lations.~ 
Open water swimmers should plan their nutritional requirements with the 
same scientific acumen as any endurance athletes.’, During ultra-endurance 
events exceeding 4 hours’ duration, an account must be made for carbohydrate 
repletion as well as fluid losses. The potential for electrolyte imbalance, particu- 
larly hyponatremia, represents a critical concern. No less important is the need 
to replenish depleted blood sugar levels. The contemporary range of sports 
drinks offers open water swimmers fluid, electrolyte, and glucose requirements 
through any one of several commercial preparations.’ These are palatable prod- 
ucts, effective during competition and for prolonged restoration of fuel and fluid 
balance after prolonged exertion. 
346 GERRARD 
FINA RULES FOR OPEN WATER SWIMMING 
FINA has a legal responsibility for all open water swimming events con- 
ducted under its sanction. To this end there are several significant rules that 
regulate the safety of such events. They are clearly outlined in the FINA Hand- 
book5 and include the following: 
OWS 5.2 The course shall be in water that is subject to only minor currents or 
tide and may be salt or fresh water. 
OWS 5.3 A certificate of suitability for use of the venue shall be issued by the 
local health and safety authorities. In general terms the certification must 
relate to water purity and to physical safety from other considerations. 
The Safety Officer shall: 
OWS 3.32 Be responsible. . . for all aspects of safety related to the conduct of 
the competition. 
OWS 3.36 In conjunction with the Medical Officer. . . advise conditions unsuit- 
able for staging the competition. . . and make recommendations for the 
modification of the course.. . . 
The Medical Officer shall: 
OWS 3.38 Inform local medical authorities of the nature of the competition 
and ensure that any casualties can be evacuated to medical facilities at the 
earliest opportunity. 
OWS 3.39 Ensure that a medical inspection is made of each competitor. . . 
and report any persons who in their opinion are unfit to compete. . . . 
CONCLUSION 
Clearly, open water swimming has emerged as an aquatic discipline in its 
own right. Given the wide range of physical and environmental demands placed 
upon participants, there is a requirement for continuing medical interest in the 
sport. Despite these factors, the open water remains a lure to an increasing 
number of swimmers. The role of the physician is to ensure their safety. 
References 
1. Burke LM, Hawley JA: Nutritional strategies for athletic performance. In Fields KB, 
Fitch PA (eds): Medical Problems in Athletes. Malden, Massachusetts, Blackwell Sci- 
ence, 1997, pp 349-364 
2. Butcher JD, Gambrell RC Hypothermia. In Fields KB, Fitch PA (eds): Medical Problems 
in Athletes. Malden, Massachusetts, Blackwell Science, 1997, p 285-292 
3. Cofield RH, Simonet WT: The shoulder in sports. Mayo Clin Proc 59:157-164, 1984 
4. Dean PL: Open Water Swimming. Champaign, Human Kinetics, 1998 
5. FINA Handbook 1998-2000, Federation Internationale de Natation Amateur, Lausanne, 
6. Fowler P: Swimmer problems. Am J Sports Med 7141-142, 1979 
7. Fowler PJ, Webster MS Shoulder pain in highly competitive swimmers [abstract]. J 
8. Freudenthal AR, Joseph PR Seabather’s eruption. N Engl J Med 329:542-544, 1993 
9. Gambrell RC: Hyperthermia and heat-related illnesses. In Fields KB, Fitch PA (eds): 
Medical Problems in Athletes. Malden, Massachusetts, Blackwell Science, 1997, pp 279- 
284 
10. Kellett JJ: Medical considerations in aquatic sports. In Bloomfield, Fricker PA, Fitch K Switzerland, 1997, pp 149-160 
Bone Joint Surg Br 66304, 1984 
OPEN WATER SWIMMING 347 
(eds): Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, ed 2. Melbourne, Blackwell Science, 
1995, pp 576-589 
11. Kennedy JC, Hawkins RJ: Swimmer’s shoulder. Physician and Sports Medicine 2:34- 
38, 1974 
12. Lillegard WA, Butcher JD: Ears, eyes, nose, and throat problems. In Fields KB, Fitch 
PA (eds): Medical Problems in Athletes. Malden, Massachusetts, Blackwell Science, 
13. Lillgard WA, Butcher JD, Fields KB: Dermatological problems in Athletes. In Fields 
KB, Fitch PA (eds): Medical Problems in Athletes. Malden, Massachusetts, Blackwell 
Science, 1997, pp 234-247 
14. Matheson JA, Gerrard DF Some common overuse syndromes in swimmers. New 
Zealand Journal of Sports Medicine 14:2-5, 1986 
15. McMaster WC: Swimming injuries-an overview. Sports Med 22:332-336, 1996 
16. Penny JN, Welsh RP: Shoulder impingement syndromes in athletes and their surgical 
17. Rathbun JB, MacNab I: The microvascular pattern of the rotator cuff. J Bone Joint Surg 
18. Reid HA: Epidemiology of sea-snake bites. J Tropical Med Hyg 78:106-113, 1975 
19. Richardson AB, Jobe FW, Collins HR The shoulder in competitive swimming. Am J 
20. Williamson JA: Marine envenomation. In Fields KB, Fitch PA (eds): Medical Problems 1997, pp 170-178 
management. Am J Sports Med 9:11-15, 1981 
Br 52:540-553, 1970 
Sports Med 8159-163, 1980 
in Athletes. Malden, Massachusetts, Blackwell Science, 1997, pp 30.5311 
Address reprint requests to 
David F. Gerrard, MBChB, FACSP 
Dunedin School of Medicine 
Great King Street 
Dunedin 9001 
New Zealand 
e-mail: david.gerrard@stonebow.otago.ac.nz 
View publication stats
