An investigation of swimming coaches’ 
perceptions on injuries in swimming and their 
self-reported actions towards injury management 
and prevention. 
Amy Tinneny-Phillips 
A thesis submitted in partial fulfilment of the req uirements for the degree of Master of 
Osteopathy, Unitec Institute of Technology, 2021  
I Abstract 
Background: Swimming is a popular and accessible recreational activity and competitive sport 
in New Zealand.  It is also the foundation of many other recreational activities and sports based 
in, on, and around water. Due to the high level of training that competitive swimmers partake in, 
the current literature discusses the injuries that may occur from swimming including swimmers’ 
shoulder, swimmers’ knee, and ba ck pain. Rehabilitation of swimming injuries is paramount to 
helping swimmers returning to full tr aining and competing capabilities.   
Aim: To investigate the perception of swimming co aches regarding swimming injuries and their 
self-reported actions towards in jury management in swimming. 
Method: Five swim coaches from New Zealand were recr uited to take part in a series of one-to-
one interviews.  These interviews were then re corded and transcribed. The qualitative approach 
of interpretive description was used to analyse the data and find key themes from the data. 
 Results: Three key themes were identified from this study 1) coaches’ perceptions of injuries, 2) 
self -reported actions, 3) communication with he alth care providers. The participants perception 
of injuries in swimming mainly focused on an ev ent occurring out of the water, that would then 
be further aggravated and cause issue for the swimmer when training.  There was little 
perception of injuries occurring directly becaus e of swimming.  The participants discussed good 
management strategies that are in line with guidelines to managing injured athletes.  Their actions reported decreasing the frequency and intensity of training sessions, while monitoring the 
strength and fitness of a swimmer returning to full training. The coaches did not communicate 
with health care providers directly very often and were more often informed of injuries and 
rehabilitation progress through the swimmer. 
Keywords: Swimming, overuse injury, Swimming injury , coaches’ perception, coach – athlete 
relationship, injury management. 
II Acknowledgements 
First and foremost, thank you to my parents.  Thank you, Mama-B (Berny), for your continuous 
and never ending support through my osteopathy journey. Thank you also for your words of 
encouragement to "just hurry up and get your thesis done!" See - I was actually listening! 
Thank you to my late dad Steve, I wish you coul d have been here to see what I have achieved 
and I hope I have  made you proud. 
Thank you to my supervisor Rob for your ong oing guidance, knowledge and encouragement 
throughout this process. Your time working with me has been incredibly valuable. Thank you to 
Wes for agreeing to be my second supervisor, your knowledge and insight on sports coaching 
and sports physiology has been greatly appreciated.  
Thank you to the five participants who volunteered and took time from their busy work 
schedules to sit down with  me and take part in this process.   I am infinitely grateful for your 
insights and if it were not for you taking part I could not have completed this paper. 
Thank you to my gorgeous friends for supplying me with unlimited amounts of coffee and 
encouraging talks when the going was getting tough. I owe you a tall glass of champagne to 
celebrate completing my thesis. 
Thank you to Holly, my amazing boss. Thank you for your encouragement and helping me 
balance work with the ta sk of taking on a thesis. You have become a great mentor and friend. 
Finally, thank you to Dr. Falkov and my wonderful oncology team. You definitely played a vital 
part in me being able to complete this pr oject and I will always be truly grateful. 
III Table of contents  
A b s t r a c t  I  
Acknowledgements  II 
Table of contents  III 
Chapter One: Introduction 
Introduction 1 
P r o j e c t  a i m  1  
Background 2 
Swimming culture in New Zealand  2 
Swimming New Zealand (organisation) 3 
Competitive swimming  4 
Why study the perception of coaches? 5 
Rationale for the study  5 
Summary  6  
Chapter Two:  Literature review C h a p t e r  o v e r v i e w   7  
Part one – Athletic Injury 7 
Defining athletic injury  7 
 Aetiology of sporting injuries  8 
Common swimming injuries  10 
Part Two – Training concepts 13 
Periodisation in sport 13 
IV Training workloads and overtraining 14 
 Treatment and management protocols 15 
Part Three – The role of the coach 17 
What is the role of the coach?  17 
 Current coaching approaches  18 
 Coach-athlete relationship 20 
Summary  21 
Chapter Three: Methodology and Methods   2 2  
C h a p t e r  o v e r v i e w   2 2  
Methodology 22 
 Qualitative research 22 
 Interpretive description 23 
Authenticity and rigour in qua litative research 24 
 Clear audit trail 25 
 C r e d i b i l i t y   2 6  
M e t h o d s  2 7  
 S a m p l i n g  2 7  
 Participant recruitment 27 
 S e l e c t i o n  c r i t e r i a  2 8  
 S a m p l e  s i z e  2 9  
Data collection – semi-structured interviews 29 
 Recording and transcription  29 
V  D a t a  a n a l y s i s  3 0  
 E t h i c s  3 1  
 Informed consent 31 
 Confidentiality 31 
 Identifying conflict of interest 32 
 Identifying researcher bias 33 
Chapter Four: Findings 34 
C h a p t e r  o v e r v i e w   3 4  
 Theme one: Coaches perceptions of injury  35 
Subtheme 1a: Outside of the pool matters 35 
 Subtheme 1b: Good technique  36 
 Subtheme 1c: Gains versus pain  36 
Subtheme 1d: When do coaches intervene? 38 
 Theme two: Self-reported actions 39 
 Subtheme 2a: Program adaptation  40 
Subtheme 2b: Self-management advice 41 
 Subtheme 2c: Referral  42 
Theme three: Communication with health care practitioners  42 
 Subtheme 3a: Indirectly through the swimmer  43 
Subtheme 3b: Indirectly through the parents  44 
Subtheme 3c: Directly with health care providers 44 
VI Chapter Five: Discussion  4 6  
C h a p t e r  o v e r v i e w   4 6  
Coaches perceptions of injury  46 
Self-reported actions 47 
Communications with health care providers  48 
Implications from this study  49 
Further research 49 
L i m i t a t i o n s   5 0  
Conclusion  50 
References  5 2  
Appendices 
 Appendix A 56 
 Appendix B 58 
 Appendix C 59 
 Appendix D 63 
 Appendix E 65 
List of Tables and Figures  
Table  1: Swimming New Zealand definiti ons – coaches and competitive swimmers 3 
Figure 1: Multi-factorial model of at hletics injuries, Mueeuwisse 2007 9 
Figure 2: Coaching style spectrum Mitchell 2013  18 
VII Figure 3: Flow of communication betw een coach, athlete and clinician   
 Brukner & Kahn 2014 20 
Figure 4: What are coaches perceptions  to injuries in swimming 35 
Figure 5: Self-reported actions  40 
Figure 6: Communication with health care practitioners 43
1 Chapter One 
Introduction 
This thesis investigates the perceptions of swimming coaches regarding injuries in swimming 
and their self-reported actions when injuries occur in their athletes. A unique aspect of being an 
athlete is that musculoskeletal pain can be a sign of adaptation where the body is becoming fitter and stronger, or it could be a sign of injury. Th e coaches’ perceptions of injuries and how they 
manage injuries is the focus of this study.  
Sports medicine has evolved into a multidisciplinary field where the study, diagnosis, and 
management of injuries can include doctors and manual therapists.   Health care practitioners 
who have an interest in sporting injuries can all play a role in the prevention, treatment, and 
management of athletic injuries and help facilitate an athlete to return to competition 
performance after injury. (Magee, Quillen, & Zachazewski, 1996) 
Chapter one introduces the project aim and the sport of swimming. It examines why swimming is 
a popular sport in New Zealand and covers as pects of competitive swimming, including the 
governing bodies for both New Zealand and international competitions. This information is discussed to give the reader an understanding of the principal features of competitive swimming.  
Project aim 
The aim of this study was to investigate: 
The perceptions of swimming coaches on inju ries in swimming, and their self-reported
actions towards injury management and prev
ention.
2 Background 
This section investigates the swimming culture in New Zealand and how this leads to it being a 
popular sport both recreationally and competitivel y.  It discusses the organisation and structure 
of competitive swimming and introduces the leve ls of coaches and swimmers as defined by 
Swimming New Zealand.  
Swimming culture in New Zealand 
Geographically, the most ‘inland’ place in New Ze aland is 128km from the coastline.  Therefore, 
New Zealanders can conveniently reach a swimma ble body of water within two hours travel and 
this geography affords an affinity with th e water for many New Zealanders. This drives 
participation in aquatic sports  and underlines why swimming is a popular recreational activity 
and competitive sport in New Zealand. 
Popular aquatic activities include su rfing, surf lifesaving, sailing,  and kayaking, all of which are 
sports where New Zealand has performed highly  in both national and international events. 
Competitively, New Zealand has a long hist ory of international success in competitive 
swimming including World Championships, Comm onwealth Games, and the Olympic Games.  
Overall, New Zealand holds 7 Olympic swimming medals and 84 commonwealth swimming 
medals . (NZ Olympic organisation, 2018). 
The crucial skill involved in all aquatic activities and sports is the ability to ‘swim’ . Swimming 
has been defined as the coordinated movement of all four limbs (in varying disciplines/co-ordinations) to produce propulsion of the body through water (Britannica, 2020).  Competitive 
swimming events take place in both controlled pool environments, and as ‘outdoor’ events such as open-water swimming events (Swimming New Zealand, 2020)  
3 Swimming New Zealand (organisation) 
Swimming New Zealand is the national sports organisation for competitive swimming for both 
pool and open water disciplines.  Swimming New Zealand is an affiliate of both Fina 
Internationale de Natation (FINA – international swimming body) and the New Zealand Olympic Committee.   
Competitive swimmers and coaches must register with a swim club associated with Swimming 
New Zealand and register with Swimming New Zeal and themselves to be el igible to compete in 
Swimming New Zealand endorsed events.  Th ere are currently 164 Swimming New Zealand 
clubs nationwide.  The common progression of Ne w Zealand swimmers is to compete in local 
club competitions, then regionals, then na tionals, depending on qualifying times.  
This study referred to the grades of coaches and the level of swimmers they coach as set by 
Swimming New Zealand.  Below are the defini tions of New Zealand swimming coaches, and 
two categories of swimmer levels that defi ne a competitive swimmer in New Zealand. 
Table 1:  Swimming New Zealand definiti ons – coaches and competitive swimmers 
(Swimming New Zealand, 2020) . 
Premium Coach  Coaches who coach clubs or coach Swimming NZ members, Premium Coaches 
receive membership to New Zealand Swim Teachers and Coaches Association are 
police vetted and will have access to poolside at all Swimming New Zealand 
National Events. 
Associate Coach  Coaches who coach clubs or coach Swimming NZ members, Associate Coaches 
receive membership to New Zealand Swim Teachers and Coaches Association are police vetted and will have access to poolside at selected Swimming New Zealand Events. 
Competitive swimmer  Swimmers who wish to compete for a club at all swim meets including Swimming 
New Zealand National Events or Regional Championships. 
Club Swimmer  Swimmers who wish to compete for a club at an Inter-Club Meet, Club 
Championship, club night, Time Trial or School Championship. (This would also include master’s swimmers)  
4 Competitiv e swimming 
Federation Internationale De Natation (FINA) is the world gove rning body that is responsible for 
organizing and setting the rules for international swimming events. 
There are four disciplines (known as swim strokes) in competitive swimming. 
●Freestyle – also known as the front crawl, this swim is performed in the prone position ,
with
 alternating overarm strokes and a continuous up-and-down (flutter) kick .
●Butterfly –  
is performed in the prone position where both arms are lifted simultaneously
out of the water and pushed forward, in combination with the dolphin kick.
●Bac
kstroke –  is performed with the swimmer in a supine position with armstr okes
rotati
ng backwards and a continuous up-and-down (flutter) kick.
●B
reaststroke –  is performed in the prone position in which both hands are
si
multaneously pushed forward, outward, then back together (in a large circular motion )
in 
front of the chest.  The legs perform the fro g kick.
(FINA, 2017
) 
FINA recognizes 17 individual pool swimming events, these are: freestyle (50m, 100m, 200m, 
400m, 800m, 1500m), backstroke (50m, 100m, 200m), breaststroke (50m, 100m, 200), and 
butterfly (50m, 100m, 200m)  
There is a fifth race called the individual medley where the swimmer will perform each 
discipline, for the same distance (e.g. 200m medley will be 50m of each swim style). The 
individual medley event will always be swum in this order - butterfly, backstroke, breaststroke, 
freestyle.  There are also team relay events, where 4 swimmers from the same club (or country) swim the same distance and swim stroke. 
Competitions can occur as a short course event where the pool is 25metres in length or a long 
course event where the pool is 50metres in length.   Olympic events are always held at a 50metre 
pool venue. The aim of a competitive swimmer is to  move through the water as efficiently and as 
fast as possible.  Each of the four swimmi ng competitive strokes (freestyle, backstroke, 
breaststroke, and butterfly) requires well timed movement of the arms and legs to move efficiently through the water.   
5 Why study the perception of coaches? 
It is of interest what communication coaches have with health care providers and to explore their 
perceptions of injuries and how they manage injuries in swimming. There is currently little 
investigation into the attitudes and beliefs of sports  coaches to the rehabilitation of athletes.  As 
coaches spend a lot of time with athletes, they  will have a key role in helping and managing 
injuries their athletes have. This gives weight to the importance of this study and possible future 
studies to gain a better understanding of coach es’ perceptions for athlete rehabilitation and the 
effectiveness of communication between the three key parties: the athlete, the coach, and the 
practitioner. 
Rationale for the study 
The popularity of swimming as a competitive spor t, and its links to other recreational aquatic 
activities in New Zealand makes swimming related injuries a valuable line of investigation for 
health and sports medicine practitioners who may consult with swimming athletes.   
Time away from training could hinder an athlete’s performance or return to sport and there is a significant cost for the treatment and rehabilitation of sports injures. In New Zealand injuries are 
covered by Accident Compensation Corporation (A CC). Their statistics show that between 2018 
and 2019 there were 8,986 new sw imming related injuries  registered and the cost of swimming 
related claims was $27,362,439 (Appendix E). This  is a substantial amount of money spent on 
the rehabilitation and tr eatment of swimming injuries in New Zealand. With the popularity and 
accessibility of swimming in Ne w Zealand and the high cost of injury rehabilitation, it is a 
worthwhile line of investigation to explore th e relationships between the multiple parties who 
have a role in the recovery process. The core relationships explored in this study are those 
between the coach, athlete, and the health care practitioner.  
6 Summary  
This research aims to explore and understand the perceptions of coaches on injuries in swimming 
and gain insight of their self-r eported actions towards injury management and prevention. An 
improved understanding of coac hes’ attitudes and beliefs to in jury prevention and management 
may help in the development of strategies to improve collaboration between rehabilitation 
providers, athletes, and coaches.   
7 Chapter two 
Literature review 
Chapter ov
erview 
This literature review is presented in three parts.   Part one introduces the definition of a sports 
injury and describes common swimming injuries, part two discusses sports training concepts that 
are essential for coaches when measuring progress ion in their athletes. The third part discusses 
the role of the coach in sports training and why communication with coaches is vital for the 
athlete in times of recovery. 
Part one: Athletic injury 
Defining athletic injury 
There are currently multiple definitions of injury in sports medicine research, and these may 
differ depending on what code of sport is being studied. Due to the variations in sport injury 
definitions, it can make comparison between studies difficult and lead to inconsistencies in sports 
injury research. Therefore, the first task for this ch apter is to explore - what is an athletic injury? 
The below definition was proposed by Fuller (2006) and accepted by the International Football 
Federation consensus statement in 2006.  It is currently accepted and used by the international 
organizations of Rugby Union, Rugby League, and the Olympic games (Fuller et al, 2006) 
“Any physical complaint (cause d by a transfer of energy th at exceeds the body’s ability 
to maintain its structural and/or functional integrity) sustained by an athlete during competition or training directly related to th e sport or exercise activity investigated, 
irrespective of the need for medical attentio n or time loss from athletic activity.” 
8 Ful
ler discusses that this definition is for physic al injuries and does not include medical events 
that can be caused or occur from sports (for example hypothermia) or psychological conditions 
that could impact on an athlete’s health. 
Brukner and Khan (2014) categorise sports injuries as either acute injuries or overuse injuries, 
dependent on the mechanism of injury and the onset of symptoms.  Acute injuries are also 
known as macro-trauma injuries. They occur fr om sudden direct trauma and cause noticeable 
immediate injury (e.g. sprain, fracture, dislocatio n, abrasion). Windt and Gabbett (2017) describe 
a sudden and direct trauma as a certain inciting event occurring, wherein the stress of the event 
exceeds the tolerance of the athlete’s tissues and injury ensues.   Overuse injuries are also known as micro-trauma  injuries. They are defined as chronic, long 
standing, or recurrent musculoske letal problems that are not initia ted by an acute injury (Windt 
& Gabbett, 2017) Olivios and Tate (2016) describe  an overuse injury as an injury caused by 
repeated micro trauma without a single, identif iable event responsible for the injury.  The 
majority of swimming injuries that occur in competitive swimmers are associated with overuse 
injuries rather than acute injuri es, due to the high volume of repetitive movement they do with 
certain muscle groups and joints.  This is discussed in more detail in the section below covering swimming injuries. 
Aetiology of sporting injuries 
Aetiology is the investigation of the possible causes of medical diseases, conditions, and injuries  
(Oxford medical dictionary, 2010). Where the definitions above are specific to describing the 
physical and biomechanical changes on the body’s  tissues (bones, ligaments, tendons, muscles), 
aetiology is focused on investigating the environment surrounding the athlete that can lead to injury (for example, sporting equipment or other athletes, that may cause injury.) 
9 The classic research on this is shown in the Meeuwisse’s multifactorial model of athletic injuries.  
Figure 1, Multi-factorial model of athletic  injuries, Meeuwisse 2007 (Taken from Windt & 
Gabbett article, 2016) 
Meeuwisse’s model (figure 1) describes internal and external risk factors that leave an athlete 
susceptible to injury. The internal risk factors consider an athlete’s skill level and body 
composition which may predispose the athlete to possible injury.  The external risk factors 
consider the sporting environment and equipment that an athlete may use in training and their 
sport. More detailed examples of internal and ex ternal factors are identified in figure 1.  The 
third branch gives examples of inciting events that can lead to injury. 
The aetiology model and sports injury definiti ons given above (by both Brukner & Khan and 
Windt & Gabbett) describe the multi-causal situations  needed for injury to occur.  It shows there 
could be sudden trauma which tends to cause an acute event, or an overload of the body’s tissues 
causing a chronic overuse injury.   Defining the term ‘athletic injury’ highlights the importance 
of understanding the mechanism of injury as either  acute or overuse.  An inciting event would be 

10 more recognizable in an acute sports injury but may not be as easily recognisable in the onset of 
an overuse injury, due to the aggravation of re peated micro trauma seen  in chronic injuries. 
Common swimming injuries 
The section below gives a brief overview of th e most common musculoskeletal issues that 
swimmers experience.  The three most common ar eas of complaints of injury and discomfort 
reported by swimmers are swimmers shoulder, swimmers knee, and back pain (Adiele & 
Morgan, 2018)  
Swimmer’s shoulder:  
There is some debate over the current term ‘Swimmer’s shoulder’.  Bak (2010)  suggests that 
swimmer’s shoulder is an umbrella term for any pain or discomfort experienced by the swimming athlete in the shoulder region.  Generalised shoulder discomfort is a common 
complaint for swimmers and neighboring anatomical sites can contribute to their pain, such as 
the scapula, cervical & thoracic spine, pectoral muscles, and upper extremity muscles such as the 
deltoid. The joints of the shoulder (gleno-hume ral joint, acromio-clavicular joint, sterno-
clavicular joint) can also be aggravated to cause shoulder pain (Brukner & Khan, 2014.) However, it is worth noting that swimmer’s should er is more often being presented as a specific 
condition that differentiates itself from ‘general shoulder pain’. This emphasises the importance 
of understanding the mechanism of in jury and biomechanics of swimming. 
De Martino and Rodeo (2018) discuss the four key factors seen in the onset of swimmers shoulder.   
1)Inflammation and irritation:  Of the supras pinatus tendon, long head bicep tendon, and
sub-acromial bursa.  This is caused by the shoulder impingement syndro
me.
2)Li
gament laxity: Swimmers tend to have increased ligament laxity due to both adaptation
from the high repetition of shoulder rotations, a nd inherent ligament laxity.  This leads to
increased i
nstability and altered position of th e gleno-humeral joint.  The altered position
11 of the gleno-humeral head is usually found to be more anterior and superior which 
encroaches on the sub-acromial space. 
3)Muscular imbalances and fatigue: Swimmers te nd to strengthen and develop the adductor
and internal rotator muscle groups during swim strokes and engaging muscles fo r
propulsion.  Therefo
re, the ex ternal rotator and scapula stab iliser muscle groups beco me
weaker
 in comparison as they are not engage d as much in the propulsion or ‘pull’ phase
of swi
mming stro kes.
4)Train
ing errors:  Such as overloading, or poor technique are considered to be contributi ng
factors.
The
 cumulative effect of muscle imbalance, liga ment laxity, and inappropriate load of training 
can lead to swimmers shoulder.  
Swimmers knee: 
Rodeo (1999)  states that the knee is the second most reported site of injury among swimmers. 
Knee pain can occur from swimming due to the frequent flexion and extension motion performed 
during kicking.  This is a subtle/passive movement  at the knee joint, as swimmers are trained to 
not ‘actively’ bend the knee – but rather generate the movement from their hips and ankles.  This 
motion is further enhanced from the constant ‘push & pull’ hydrodynamic forces created in the 
water from kicking.  This caus es the knee to develop increase d flexibility/mobility and cause 
hyperextension of the knee joints and laxity of the knee ligaments. 
The term “Swimmers Knee” is more likely used to describe injury to the medial collateral 
ligament caused breaststroke kick.  Breaststrokers are up to 5 times more likely to report knee 
pain than any of the other swimming disciplines ( Hefzollesan et al  2014).  
Wanivenhaus et al (2012) further state that quantifying the prevalence of swimmer’s knee is more difficult than swimmer’s shoulder, as on MRI of breaststroke sw immers reporting knee 
pain, there is a higher chance of infrapatellar fat pad edema (53.8%), prefemoral fat pad edema (19%), and joint effusion (15.3%) to appear, when compared to an age-and-gender matched 
control group that does not regular ly practice any impact sports. 
12 Breaststroke kick starts with the knee in full flexion, the hip externally rotated, the ankle in 
flexion, and the foot everted.  This causes a st retching tension over the medial aspect of the knee 
joint, stressing the medial collateral ligament s (partnered with a ‘compression or pinching’ 
occurring at the lateral coll ateral ligament). The swimmer will quickly extend the knees, 
internally rotate the hips, and abduct the legs together to complete th e breaststroke kick phase 
(Brukner & Khan, 2014).  Increased varus and valgus loads also occur in the knee in addition to 
rapid knee extension. The frequent change of tens ion and ‘whip’ like forces put through the knee 
during breaststroke kick causes irritation and disc omfort for swimmers at the medial aspect and 
anterior of the knee. 
Lower back pain: 
Lower back pain is another common site for pai n Pollard and Fernandez, M. (2004).  They 
reported that lower back pain is more freque ntly reported by butterfly and breaststroke 
swimmers. This is related to the extension throug h the back required to perform these swimming 
strokes. 
Wanivenhaus et al (2012) discuss the biomecha nical position of the spine, stating that all 
swimming strokes maintain hyperextension of the lower back to achieve a streamlined position. 
This position is exaggerated in th e “undulating” (extension) style of breathing in breaststroke and 
butterfly. The high frequency and repetitiveness of these strokes load the posterior structures of the lumbar spine (facet joints an d erector spinae muscles), which can result in pain.  Therefore, 
the lumbar spine is compromised due to the repeated hyperextension required for the breathing technique in breaststroke and butterfly disciplines.   Nyska et el (2000) also discuss the additional 
risk factors for the development of low back pa in in competitive swimmers are training devices 
such as fins, kick boards, or pull buoys as th ese produce additional hyperextension of the lumbar 
spine.  It is important to note that maintain ing hyperextension during the streamline position can 
also affect the thoracic spine, which can cause a ‘flattening’ of the kyphotic curve, causing swimmers to have an appearance of a ‘flat back ’, or in adolescent swimmers, the potential 
appearance of Scheuermann's  spine, where the kyphosis is maintained lower in the thoracic 
spine, Nyska et el (2000). 
13 During freestyle and backstroke, it is necessary for swimmers to perform a ‘body roll’ motion.  
This describes the consistent switch to the left and right side, required to help complete long 
controlled swim strokes and to help the swi mmer move through the water in a more dynamic 
position.  Both the increase in spinal extension and the frequent rotational movement through the 
spine which is most reported as thoracic spine discomfort by swimmers (Vila Dieguez & Barden , 
2020). 
Part two: Training concepts  
This section discusses key training concepts used  by coaches to help monitor the intensity and 
frequency of training.  These include Periodization of sport, trai ning workloads and overtraining, 
and treatment and management protocols. These are important considerations for this study as 
these are all factors that may be impacted if an  athlete is injured.  Recovery and rehabilitation 
time may impact how a coach implements these protocols.  
Periodization in sport 
Periodization is strategic planning that can be desc ribed as the intentional peaking of an athlete’s 
performance for matches or events of priority th roughout a competitive season. This consists of 
the management of training volumes and intensit ies over distinct time periods to optimize 
athletes’ preparedness for upcoming events. Periodiza tion is said to be a useful tool in managing 
the travel schedules, fatigue and injuries that often go along with competitive sport (Dick, 2014). 
Dick (2014) discusses that the organization of  the periodization strategy should have three 
objectives in focus: 
●To prepare the athlete for the achievement of an optimal improvement in thei r
perf
ormanc e.
●To 
prepare the athlete for a definite clim ax to the competition season (e.g. major
competition such as a national championships event)
●To prepare the athlete for the main competit ions in the build up to that major ev ent
14 Bompa & Buzzichelli  (2015) discusses the two circumstances  where periodization is applied.  
These are periodization of the annual plan and peri odization of biomotor abilities.  Periodization 
of the annual plan breaks the training plan into sections to help the coach manage and organize 
the training and adaptation process of the athlete and ensures these are programmed to line up 
with key competitive events. Biomotor abilitie s include strength, speed, and endurance. 
Periodization of the biomotor abilities help s coaches to develop the athletes’ optimal 
performance by planning on when to program training to improve these skills.  
Periodization will have an influence on when coaches schedule changes in a training program, 
such as the intensity, duration, and frequency of  training schedules.  Implementing these cycles 
incorrectly or rushing an athlete through these cycles to quickly can lead to injury as depicted 
above in the workload-injury model.  
Traini
ng workloads and overtraining  
Workloads quantify the demands imposed on an athlete during matches and training sessions. 
Workloads are defined as the accum ulation from multiple training demands placed on an athlete 
through training sessions and competitive events over a period (Windt & Gabbett, 2016). It encompasses the frequency of training sessions, the intensity of sessions, and the increase in load 
leading up to events that occurs in preparation for important events. The workload of an athlete 
is determined by the competitive demands of the sport.  With swim tr aining, the goal is to 
improve the swimmer’s ability to move through the water as quickly as possible. This is 
achieved by increasing the volu me and intensity of training leading up to competitive events. 
Therefore, doing performance time trials throughout the training season is the most attainable 
way to gauge if swimmers are adapting to  increasing workloads (Havriluk, 2013).  
In swimming, the training load is the combination of volume, intensity, and frequency. For elite swimmers, they will be swimming a volume of 10- 20 kilometres daily over two sessions 
(Chartard & Stewart, 2011).  Age group swimmers will be swimming between 1-4 kilometres 
during training sessions (Pyne, 2001) 
 
Int
ensity is measured by monitoring heart ra te, oxygen uptake, and the swimming pace the 
15 swimmer is maintaining.  Frequency is determined by the number of sessions swimmers attend 
over the week.  There are usually four phases of periodization in swimming. These are 1) 
Obtaining baseline fitness 2) Accelerating the training load 3) High training load 4) Tapering -reducing training load.  (Chartard & Stewart, 2011) 
It
 is important to get the right balance of training frequency and intensity to improve athlete 
adaptation and performance whilst li miting the onset of injuries.  Whilst there are elements of 
risk factors (intrinsic and extrinsic) and inciting events that can cause injury, overuse injuries  are 
sustained while athletes are inco rrectly exposed to training and competition workloads (Windt & 
Gabbett 2016).   
Treatment and management protocols  
Treatment and management  protocols are outlined below as these are the suggested steps when 
managing the rehabilitation of an injury. Bru kner and Kahn (2014) sugge st the treatment of 
sporting injuries usually require the four asp ects below to be considered and addressed: 
1.Addressing the cause, if known. (Example: a certain technique drill, or length of practi ce
s
ession.)
2.Activity modification. (have the athlete te mporarily stop the aggravating movement s,
lessen
ing training inte nsity or frequency)
3.Sp
ecific exercises for tissue repa ir (the clinician may prescrib e certain stretches or muscle
activation exerci ses)
4.Manu
al therapy and pharmacologic treatment.  (This could also include other therapies
su
ch as compression, hot/cold treatment, electrotherapies etc. )
(Brukner 
& Khan, 2014) 
O’Connor et al (1997) described five steps for managing injures and this study specifically 
looked at overuse (micro-trauma) injuries.  They  describe overuse injuries are the result of 
repetitive micro-traumas wh ich leads to inflammati on and local tissue damage. They also discuss 
16 contributing factors such as changing the inte nsity and duration of training without adequate 
recovery time can lead to overloading tissues in  the body and create injury.  This concurs with 
the workload-injury model discussed above. As ove ruse injuries are more likely to occur in 
swimming injuries, the steps outlined below would be more suitable when managing a 
swimming injury.  Some of the advice outlined in  these steps suggests changes to training which 
could impact the coaches planning of training programs for injured athletes. 
Five steps for injury management of an overuse injury are: 
1.Make a pathoanatomic diag nosis.
An accurate 
diagnosis of overuse injury has be en given from a physician or manual therapist. 
2.Control inflammation
This encompasses a wide scope of interventions  including the RICE (rest, ice, compression, 
elevation) protocol, through to receiving corticosteroid injections. For athletes, complete rest and 
halting all training may be counter intuitive as th ey may lose overall fitness. This protocol 
suggests relative rest by decrea sing training duration and/or intensity or decreasing the workload 
of possible injured muscle groups while they recover. 
3.Promote heali ng.
As infl
ammation causes pain, once an athlete has inflammation under control, this may see them 
return to full training prematurely as it can be misinterpreted that lessened or no pain means the 
injured tissues have recovered.  This is where pr omoting healing is vital. This is when it is 
essential to complete a full rehabilitation pr ogram that is prescribed by a practitioner. 
4.Increase fitn ess.
Whe
n an athlete is pain free and completed their full rehabilitation program the focus can return 
to regaining competition fitness and strength.  
17 5.Control tissue overlo ad.
This step 
involves controlling the tissue overload  that occurred in the first place.  This may 
include modifying incorrect technique and assessing when to increase training loads (intensity 
and duration) more scrupulously.  These changes ma y need to be put in place long term, even for 
the remainder of the athlete’s competitive career. 
While the above protocols describe the changes that  could be made to training, such as 
decreasing duration and intensity and correcting t echnique, the role of the coach implementing 
these changes is not made clear.  This study aims to explore not only coaches’ perceptions of injuries in swimming, but what th eir self-reported actions are when  managing injuries.  It is of 
interest for this study to see if these self-reported actions align to the rehabilitation steps outlined by O’Connor et al (1997) above. It is hypothesi zed that given the modifications to training 
suggested are crucial for an athl etes’ return to training and high-performance competition, that 
there could be a difference in opinion among coaches about prescribed exer cises, or modification 
of the athlete’s workload that are prescribed by manual therapists.  
Part three: The role of the coach 
This section looks at the role of the coach, lo oking what their key tasks are and why the coach-
athlete relationship is important. By understanding this relationship, it will show how valuable 
the coach is to an athlete’s rehabilitation plan. 
What is the role of the coach? 
Coaching is an occupation that is very complex to  define or describe as many people will have 
differing views on what defines a coach but w ill innately understand the role of a coach. 
Dick (2014) suggests the two main objectives for coaches should be: 
a)To create independent and capable athlet
es.
18 b)To create more skilled performances and ultima tely personal best performances when  it
cou
nts (major competitive events).
A coach must be proficient at a range of tasks.  They must be not only be focused on enhancing 
their athlete’s performance but be organised an d punctual when planning and running training 
sessions.  They need to be critical thinkers and problem solvers to tackle various issues (such as 
injuries) that may arise. This means they also need to be flex ible and adaptable with their tactics 
and training strategies. (Denison & Avner, 2011) 
Coaches need to be good communicators in many different situations.  Fundamentally they need 
to give clear technical instructions to help im prove the athlete’s perfor mance and technique, and 
co-ordinate and plan appropriate training programs to develop athletes’ skills and knowledge. 
They must also be able to communicate with a range of people to manage their athletes and 
teams when organising training timetables leading up to important competitive events (Short, 2005) 
Current coaching approaches 
There are two main styles of coaching practices; these are coach-centred coaching and athlete-centred coaching (Mitchell, 2013).  A way to consider these approaches is to see that they are on 
two ends of a coaching spectrum.  The approach  a coach uses the more may influence their 
communication style with athletes. 
Figure 2, Coaching style spectrum (Mitchell, 2013) 
Coach-centred coaching is a leadership style and is considered prescriptive where direct 
instructions are given. This style of coaching is mo st likely used in situations where the coach is 

19 introducing new drills or working on technique where precise movements from athletes must be 
learned.  The drawback of this approach is that the athlete has a limited input and coaches 
traditionally using this approach are driven by results and winning as a sign of success. This 
raises the concern if the coaching attitude be comes “winning at all costs” (Headley-Cooper, 
2010). 
On the opposite end of the spectrum Kidman (2005)  states that the athlete-centred approach is a 
leadership style that caters to athletes’ needs and understandings where athletes are enabled to 
learn and have control of their participation in  sport.” An athlete-cent red approach acknowledges 
that an athlete’s performance is enhanced and improves when there is holistic overall development of the athlete. (Kerr et al, 2018). In this approach the coach is not just a leader in 
the traditional sense but a facilitator and empowers an athlete to achieve both their performance 
best and personal best.  At the core of this approach is a strong partnership built through clear 
communication and a strong coach-athlet e relationship (Headley-Cooper, 2010). 
  Athlete-centred coaches acknowledge that pr ogression and improvement in sport does not 
always happen consistently.  The examples they gi ve are when athletes hit a plateau in training, 
working on breaking bad habits, or things gettin g worse before they get better when exploring 
things such as changing technique and skills.   
It may be necessary for a coach to be able to move along this spectrum and have times where 
they utilize a more coach centred approach or  athlete centred approach. These two coaching 
approaches are of interest to this study, as looking at Mitchells spectrum (Figure 2), the coach-
centred athlete will be told what to do, where an  athlete-centred coach will collaborate with an 
athlete with what they may want to do.  It is of  interest to see if these styles influence the way 
coaches communicate with their athl etes regarding injury management.  
20 Coach-athlete relationship: 
Brukner and Kahn (2014),  acknowledge the importance of the relationship and understanding 
between the athlete, coach, and clinician. A high level of trust and confidence in each person is 
critical for the athlete’s sports performance and recovery if injury occurs.  As the coach is 
directly responsible for setting the frequency, intensity, and training load of the athlete, as well as 
the technique development of the athlete, it is imperative that they are considered in the clinical 
decision making regarding the athletes’ health .  Brukner & Kahn (2014) also comment that 
coaches can have a distrust of clinicians, as th ere can be a difference in opinions of maximising 
athletic performance (coa ch’s focus) and maximising the health of the athlete (clinicians focus). 
It has also been discussed that the coach’s involvement and understanding of the clinicians’ plan 
is essential and can improve the athlete’s adhe rence of the recovery & management plan. The 
coach’s involvement is also very important to establish any possible technique-related cause for 
injury. Figure 3 below highlights the concerns raised about the communication between these 
three key parties. 
Figure 3. flow of communication between coach, athlete, and clinician. (Created by researcher 
with information from Brukner & Kahn, 2014) 

21 ‐ The black line  shows the ideal and equal flow of communication between all parties. 
‐ The Red Arrows  show the ‘common’ or usual flow of communication where the 
athlete is in the ‘middle’ and relaying information between the coach and clinician. 
‐ The Blue Arrow  shows the communication line that is the focus of this study.  By 
interviewing coaches on their understandi ng of injury prevention and management, 
and by asking their opinions on the role of manual therapy (in the interview process) 
we aim to gain insight to the strength of this relationship and how it can be improved. 
Summary: 
To manage an injury in a swimmer it is important to recognize the onset of injury, which in 
swimming related injuries is most likely going to be a chronic over-use injury causing micro-
trauma of the body’s tissues.  This chapter also demonstrates the importance of the role of the 
coach, as they help set the workload for athlete, including duration, frequency, and intensity. If 
these factors are not managed well, or progression is rushed, this could be predisposing the 
athlete to injury. This gives weight the aim of this study and understand coaches’ perceptions of 
injury in swimming and how they manage injuries when present.  
22 Chapter 3 
Methodology and Methods 
Chapter overview 
This chapter discusses the methodology chosen fo r this study and the methods that were utilised 
for data collection. The first part of this ch apter is focused on methodology and introduces the 
qualitative approach of interpretive description and discusses why it is suitable for this study. 
This chapter will also outline authenticity, rigo ur, credibility, and resear cher bias and why these 
are important to qualitative research. The second part of this chapter describes the methods used 
to collect and analyse the data, including sampling, data collection and data analysis methods. 
Methodology 
Qualitative research Qualitative research is a broad umbrella term which describes a variety of research processes 
which aim to analyze the observed data related to the phenomenon of interest. The phenomena of 
interest that are usually observed in qualitative rese arch are relationships, activities, or situations. 
When conducting qualitative research, data is co llected in the form of words or observation, 
rather than quantitative informat ion. As Chesebro and Borisoff (2007) explain the natural setting 
in qualitative research can be established in tw o ways.  Firstly, if data collection employs the 
observation of participants in their everyday environment, all efforts must be taken to not 
interfere or change the environment.  Secondly, wh en data is collected in responses, for example, 
by interview, it is best to establish an enviro nment where natural behaviors are not restricted.  
For example, if participants are required to co mplete written questionnaires, this data may tend to 
be more superficial, compared with an interview that flowed in conversat ion, and the interview 
derived data would typically be considered mo re in-depth because in terviewing allows the 
participants to give more detail and potentially  give new information than the restraints of a 
questionnaire.  A key feature of qualitative research  is that this approach gives consideration to 
the meanings people give to certain phrases and words and how people’s beliefs and attitudes 
may be translated into actions.  Qualitative resear ch tends to be analyzed inductively and aims to 
23 show the perspectives of the participants invol ved in the phenomenon of interest (Krageloh, 
2008). 
Common to all forms of research, qualitative research is driven by a research question or line of 
investigation. The research question helps determ ine which research meth odology is best suited 
to collect and analyse data. There are four comm on types of qualitative data collection.  These 
are conducting interviews, group discussions, surveys, and observation. These methods of data 
collection work well within qualitative research as  the aim of qualitative research is to explore 
the experiences of people to the chosen phenom ena (Carter & Henderson, 2005). This study used 
interviewing as the data collection method as the researcher would be able to get in depth 
information from the participants experiences.  
Once data collection is complete, the researcher can move to data analysis. The line of investigation for this thesis was to explore an d analyze the attitudes and beliefs of swimming 
coaches regarding injuries in swimming and the management of these injuries. A thematic 
analysis approach was selected as being suitable. Thematic analysis is a form of data analysis 
used in qualitative research to identify patterns of  meaning or themes to give understanding or an 
answer to the research question being addressed.  This method is used in many research fields 
including education, nursing, psychology, and al lied health sciences (Braun & Clarke, 2006). 
Themes are identified through a process of th e researcher becoming familiar with the data, 
coding, and developing themes. There are many approaches to thematic analysis for analyzing 
qualitative data where the focus is on identifying themes and finding meaning from the 
experiences shared by the interviewed participants. The thematic analysis approach chosen for 
this study was interpretive description. 
Interpretive description 
Interpretive description is a thematic methodology that was first described by Thorne in 1997. 
Thorne and Kirkham (2004) notes that nursing and al lied health researchers would utilize various 
tools from ‘traditional’ qualitative methodologies to conduct their studies, leaving these researchers with a generalized overview of a qua litative study, without having a constructive 
term or title, or definitive protocol to describe their research process.  The need for a recognized 
24 qualitative methodology approach in nursing and heal th care is where the interpretive description 
framework was first developed.   
A crucial factor in utilizing interpretive descript ion is that it uses an inductive approach to 
explore and filter information.  An inductive ap proach allows themes and findings to emerge 
from the data once it has been analyzed. Interpre tive description is a flexible process allowing 
multiple topics and ideas to be presented during the interview process, which provides the 
researcher with the ability to identify findings relevant to the phenomenon of interest and is not 
constrained to answering one set question (Thomp son-Burdine et al, 2021).  In specific relation 
to this project, interpretive description was appr opriate because the research questions aimed to 
investigate the perceptions of co aches regarding injuries in their sport and how they are managed 
and explore the communication of multiple partie s (coach-athlete and coach-practitioner) when 
the situation of an injured swimmer occurs. 
Authenticity and rigour in qualitative research 
Authenticity and rigour are important consider ations in qualitative research because they 
establish that the researcher has implemented a thorough and transparent process to both data 
collection and data analysis (Thorne, 2004). Aiming to ensure authenticity and rigour in research 
reassures the reader that the re search being conducted is valid and reliable.  Rigour is achieved 
through the steps a researcher implements to ensure a high standard in the protocols they are following. Having strong authenticity in a rese arch project equates to trustworthiness for the 
readers of the study (Cypress, 2017).  
During the interview process, Thorne (2004) argues that authenticity and rigour may be 
compromised for two key reasons.  Firstly, the participants may not feel comfortable to ‘open 
up’ and express their true beliefs and opinions as  they may feel ‘judged’ in their professional 
capacity and may lead to the participant withholding key information. Secondly, a participant 
may feel pressure to say what they feel the researcher wants to hear.   This could lead to 
disingenuous replies to questions and if this occurs it will bring the authenticity and rigour of the 
outcomes into question.  
25 It is also important to address researcher bias that can occur during interviews.  When conducting 
semi-structured interviews, there are two key limitations the researcher may encounter that will 
impact researcher bias (Thorne, 2004). Firstl y, by unintentionally implementing their own 
opinions and attitudes into the conversation that may challenge the participant, or pressure them into stating what they feel the researcher “wishe s to hear” rather than their true statements and 
opinions. Secondly, the researcher may be influenced from previous interviews and 
unintentionally bring presented thoughts and op inions from previous interviews into other 
interviews and ask questions that were not prev iously thought of at the beginning of the data 
collection phase. 
Interviewing is a method used extensively in qu alitative research. The purpose of interviewing is 
to find out what the views and opinions are of the individual participants are and compare these 
answers to the other responses to find any common views and perceptions (Brinkmann, 2013) 
The use of the semi structured interview format can help to overcome the above mentioned 
pressure participants may feel to answer in a way they think the interviewer wishes them too. 
Due to the nature of semi-structured interviews and the use of open-ended questions, there is flexibility for the interview to flow more ‘natur ally’ as a conversation (Schmidt, 2004).  This 
helps ensure authenticity and rigour as participan ts are given opportunity to be more forthcoming 
with their perceptions and opinions while being uninterrupted or limited in the depth of the 
replies they can give. 
Clear audit trail 
A clear audit trail can be achieved by giving a clear and transparent description of the methods 
and steps taken throughout the data collection and analysis phases of a study (Carcary, 2020). 
This has been achieved in this st udy by describing in this chapte r clearly how participants were 
recruited, how data was collected, and the anal ysis process undertaken by the researcher. By 
being as transparent and open as possible about the processes of data collection and data 
analysis, the researcher has aimed for a high le vel of trustworthiness and credibility for the 
reader.  
 
26 Credi
bility 
Credibility aims to ensure that the researcher s account is an accurate interpretation of the 
participants’ perceptions (Cypress, 2017). Credibil ity establishes whether the research findings 
are presented ‘truthfully’, and that plausible info rmation is drawn from the participants’ original 
data and is an accurate and clear interpretation of the participants’ original views (Korstjens & 
Moser 2018). Credibility is enhanced when the re searcher shows that an appropriate research 
methodology and process has been undertaken to  provide valid and trustworthy information 
when answering the research question. (Thorne, 2016).   
27 Meth
ods 
This section describes the steps and processes c onducted by the researcher to collect and analyse 
the data for this study.  It provides informati on on sampling, recruitment, sample size, data 
collection, data analysis and ethics. 
Sampling  
Purposive sampling was the sampling method used  for this study. Etikan (2016) defines 
purposive sampling as the researcher delibe rately choosing a partic ipant group due to the 
qualities and knowledge they hold.  Purposive sampling involves inviting specific participants to 
take part in a research project because they  are known to have a deep understanding or 
knowledge of the phenomenon being investigated.  The target group for this study were swim 
coaches working at clubs registered to swimming  New Zealand due to the knowledge they have 
of competitive swimming and working with competitive athletes.  Convenience sampling was 
also used in this study due to the time restraints  and project scope for a 90 credit Masters thesis. 
An example of this was suitable participants that were geographi cally closer to the researcher 
were contacted first to unsure the researcher s time was not taken up through excessive travel 
time. 
Participant recruitment 
The fi
rst step in recruitment was to identify swim ming clubs that were registered with Swimming 
New Zealand.  This was achieved by ch ecking the Swimming New Zealand website 
(www.swimming.org.nz/) Each New Zealand geographical region has a webpage with contact 
information for swim clubs in their region. Th ese clubs were identified, and contact emails 
collected. Initial contact was undertaken by the researcher emailing to introduce them self and the study along with an information sheet (Appendix A). Some contact email addresses listed on 
the regional websites were for generic contact rather than a specific individual. In these cases, 
the email request stated that it was an invite for the swim coaches of the club (Appendix B).  
28 When coaches had replied to the initial email, an  appropriate date and time were arranged where 
the interview could take place.  Interviews t ook place at swim coaches’ offices, swim club 
rooms, and a meeting room booked at a café.  Thes e places were chosen as the interviews could 
be conducted with minimal interruption a nd with a view to maintaining privacy.  
Selection criteria 
Inclusion criteria 
Must be considered a premium coach or assistant coach as defined by Sw imming
New 
Zealand (Swimming New Zealand definitions are discussed in the literatur e
review)
Must
 have been coaching for a minimum of 5 years. This helps ensure the
parti
cipants to have developed some individual experience and thought s on
coachi ng.
Can be 
coaching swimmers of any ag e.
the s
wimmers they are training are co mpeting at regional or national leve l.
Ex
clusion criteria:  
Coaches who have retired for longer than 12 months at the time of participan t
recruitment
.
Coaches who are not residing in, or  training athletes in New Zealan d
Co
aches that are not registered with Swimming New Zealand or meet thei r
definit
ion of a premium or associ ate coach.
29 Sample size  
The number of participants was informed by the concept of information power.  The basis of 
information power is that “the more information a specific sample holds, relevant for the study, 
the lower the amount of participants are needed” (Malterud et al, 2015). It was decided, through 
discussion between the researcher and supervisors that  for a study of this size and the availability 
of resources, an upper limit of 8-10 participan ts would likely be appr opriate. Due to utilizing 
purposive sampling information power can be reached with less than upper limit of participants 
set (Malterud et al, 2015).  If this occurs, the researcher can stop conducting interviews before 
the ‘upper limit’ of participants is reached . For this study, five participants were recruited and 
interviewed. The researcher stopped at five inte rviews due to timeline restrictions for this 
project. 
Data Collection - Semi-s tructured interviews 
This study used aspects of both a semi-structured and informal interview style.  The researcher 
had an interview guide (Appendix C) with prompt s and questions to help the interview stay on 
topic.  However, the questions and prompts co uld be used in any order and the informal, 
conversational approach was intende d to permit coaches to bring up topics that had not been 
originally considered by the researcher.  This ap proach to allow conversation was key as part of 
the inductive description method as it can promot e the collection of richer data from the natural 
flow of conversation or discourse betw een the researcher and participant. 
Recording and transcription 
The researcher used their password protected smar tphone to record the in terviews.  These were 
then stored on a password protected laptop that on ly the researcher had access to.  The researcher 
shared the recorded interviews with their supervisors via a shared drop box folder that only the 
researcher and supervisors had access to.  The re corded interviews were sent to a transcription 
service by the main supervisor, who then returned the transcripts to the re searcher via the shared 
drop box folder.  The researcher sent all participants a copy of their transcripts as they had 10 
working days, from the day their transcript was sent, to read and let the researcher know if they 
30 would like to change, clarify, or omit any of th e information they had given at the time of the 
interview. This information was made availabl e in both Appendix A, the information sheet and 
Appendix D, the participant consent form. 
Data analysis 
Phase one: Familiarisation  with data 
The researcher read and listened to the interviews simultaneously. This was to help to researcher 
become familiar with the data and to check for any possible mistakes. This step was repeated on 
many occasions throughout the data analysis proce ss. While repeating this process the researcher 
would make margin notes which was the start of identifying topics which were explored further 
in phase two. 
Phase two:  Organization of data into Themes 
To start this phase the researcher reviewed the interview guideline and transcripts and identified 
six broad topics of interest.  From here the re searcher created a colour-coded legend to orgranise 
the responses from the interviews into groups. This helped the re searcher to ga in understanding 
of the phenomenon studied.  Grouping the vari ous attitudes and beliefs presented into themes 
allowed the researcher into deeper investigation in the other stages. 
Phase three:  Data exploration 
The researcher further explored the identified Themes  and organised these more in-depth into 
Categories .  This is also known as ‘coding’ where key words and sentences are identified and 
attached to the broader themes.  This gives the common themes a greater strength of recognition.  
This phase was further progressed from conversa tion between the researcher and supervisors.  
Talking through and explaining the emerging categori es helped the researcher identify and refine 
emergent themes. 
Stage four:  Interpretation and Presentation of the themes and categories: 
By identifying the themes which are strengthened  by the key information categorised to them, 
the researcher is able to interpret and present the relevant and clinically important findings. The 
31 findings of this study are presented in Chapter four, findings. The findings are backed up by 
quotes from the interviews that give weight to the researcher’s interpretation of the data. 
(Krageloh 2008) 
Ethics 
An ethics application for this paper was approv ed by the Unitec Research Ethics Committee on 
the 17th April 2019.  (UREC 2019-1012). The five inte rviews were conduct ed between October 
30th 2019 and the 11th February 2020. This ethics application addressed the following issues: 
informed consent, confidentiality,  identifying conflicts of interest, and identifying researcher bias 
which are all briefly explained below. 
Informed consent 
All potential participants were provided with an  Information Sheet (Appen dix A) at the time of 
initial contact in order to make an informed deci sion about their participation in the study. Prior 
to commencing each interview, the researcher provided the participant with a consent form to 
formally acknowledge they had received, read , and understood the topic of the study, the 
interview process and record each participant’s in formed consent to participate.  The information 
sheet also stated the withdrawal process which in formed participants that they had 2 weeks to 
withdraw from the time of their interview, an d that they had ten working days, on receiving a 
copy of their transcribed interview to clarify, change, or delete any comments, before being used 
in the data analysis phase.  The consent form al so provided express permission for the researcher 
to undertake audio recording of the interviews (Appendix D). The partic ipants were informed 
that any personal information that was require d by the researcher was kept confidential. 
Confidentiality 
To maintain confidentiality the coaches and their swim clubs are not mentio ned within the study. 
All individual or identifying data (name, age, y ears working in the industry, swim club location) 
32 were anonymised.  When using transcript extracts  the coaches were referred to as CX, where C 
represents ‘coach’ and X represents an identif ication number assigned in sequential order of 
participant recruitment.  
To keep the interview recordings and transcripts confidential, they were kept electronically on a 
password protected laptop and any printed copies, along with the signed consent forms were kept 
in a locked drawer which only the researcher had access to.  In keeping with the Unitec 
regulations for all postgraduate res earch projects, the data will be st ored securely for five years.  
After this time all electronic files and transcripts will be deleted and the physical copies of the 
consent forms will be shredded.  
Identifying conflict of interest 
The researcher worked for 12 years in the aquatics industry in Auckland.  There was potential 
that previous employers and work colleagues woul d meet the inclusion criteria for this study and 
receive an invitation to participate. The process out lined within the ethics application was that if 
a conflict of interest became a pparent (e.g. someone known to the researcher expressed interest 
in participating), any issues that may have arisen  would be discussed openly with the participant 
and participation ceased if appropriate. Subseque ntly, no conflicts of interest occurred, as the 
researcher had not worked with or previously met a ny of the participants that agreed to take part 
in this study.  
33 Identifying researcher bias 
To limit the interference of researcher bias, the researcher completed the following steps.  
Firstly, the researcher was interviewed by a colleague  three months before the first interview 
with a participant took place.  This interview used the same interview guide the researcher 
developed for the interviews.  The answers of th e researcher were recorded to highlight their 
existing opinions and attitudes they may hold.  This helped the researcher acknowledge and 
recognize their potential biases before conducting interviews with participants.  This allowed the 
researcher to be aware of their existing perceptions. This awareness meant the researcher would 
not discuss their viewpoints in the interviews . Secondly, during the interviewing process that 
took place over 3 months, the researcher took reflective notes after each interview which served two purposes. It allowed the researcher to start identifying key themes that were presented in the 
interview and allow reflection on the level of influence they had on the interview. 
34 Chapter 4 
Findings 
Ch
apter overview 
This chapter presents the findings from the interv iews and these are reflective of the perceptions 
of the five swimming coach participants who we re interviewed for this study. These coaches 
were all located in the North Island of New Zealan d. Four had gained swim coaching experience 
exclusively within New Zealand and one had also worked overseas. Four participants were male, 
and one female.  Their years working as swim coaches ranged from 5 years to 25 years. Two 
participants mentioned they had completed certif icates or diplomas in sports and recreation. 
To organize the findings, they are presented in th ree main themes, along with the associated sub-
themes.  Theme one explores what the coaches’  perception of injury are. The sub-themes 
included are: Outside of the pool matters, Go od technique, gains versus pain, and when do 
coaches intervene. The second theme explores  the self-reported actions to managing and 
preventing injuries. The sub- themes that di splay these are: Program adaptation, self-
management advice, and referral. Theme three looks at the ways that coaches communicate with 
health care practitioners. These are: Indirectly  through the swimmer;  Indirectly through the 
parent, and Directly through manual therapist. 
35 Theme one: Coaches perceptions of injury
Figure 4: what are coaches percep tions to injuries in swimming. 
Subtheme 1a: Outside of the pool matters 
From the interviews there were many instances wh ere coaches would give examples of injuries 
occurring out of the pool, which would then influence the swimmer in the pool.  This gave an 
insight that participants tend to think of injuries as events that happen away from the pool rather 
than occurring specifically from swimming. 
C1: “she plays for water polo and netball and she's one of those kids that always falls over, hurts 
herself and you can guarantee that if you're doing something outside the pool she's going to be the 
one that break her finger” 
C1: “I’ll ask "Got a sore shoulder? What were you doing?" "Nothing." "Did you fall over?" 
"Nah." And so you go through the list, and then they'll say, "Oh no but, um, I did 500 pushups 
yesterday." You know what I mean?” 
C4: “I have a ton of kids that are going through their growing. They always breaks bones, or fall 
over and hurt themselves.” Part 1: What are coaches perceptions  to 
injuries in swimming
Out of the pool 
mattersGood techniqueGains versus 
painWhen do 
coaches 
intervene?
36 Subtheme 1b: Good Technique 
There appears to be a view amongst participants that maintaining “good” and “correct technique” 
in the pool would decrease the chance of injuri es directly caused by swimming.  This links to 
subtheme 1a where the participants perceive that injuries are less likely to happen in the pool 
when good technique is maintained. 
C3: “I definitely am a big believer in overuse, and with poor technique causes injuries. So, if we’re 
swimming with good technique, we don’t tend to have injuries” 
C1 “we can put you here [a different squad or group]  and then just swim to get your technique right” this 
quote was given in the context of a swimmer returning to training after a break out of the water. 
C4 “Yeah, there's a better way to do something. It's basically what my job is. If people swam perfectly, then 
you wouldn't need a coach. That's the whole point. It's what I try to get through to the kids when we're 
doing technique. As long as it's a legal stroke, it's fine. But there are more efficient ways, and ways that are 
better for you.” 
C2: “It's just getting more people understanding the complexity of swimming, stuff like that, because a lot 
of people don't, I think, understand what swimming does to ah, like the little joints and the fact that its non-weight bearing, the mileage that some swimmers can do, the repetition of some of what they do”. 
Subtheme 1c: Gains ve
rsus pain 
There was discussion about the difference between the terms ‘aches’ and ‘pains.  The word ache 
does not tend to be interpreted as injury but is  interpreted as part of routine training at a 
competitive level which should be expected to a certain degree with high level training. The 
word pain however, was more likely to be inte rpreted as injury or something more severe 
happening to the swimmer than a training ache. Par ticipants would differentiate this by adopting 
certain tools or phrases as a ‘rule of thumb’ to help their athletes express if they were 
experiencing training pain or symptoms of injury. It is to be noted that these tools and phrases 
may differ in use between coaches.  The two main  examples were using a Verbal Rating Scale 
(VRS), and the use of Keywords. The VRS scale would be used by coaches to have the swimmers either assess the exertion or threshold of  the training session or to rate their pain.  
37 Regardi
ng keywords, participants would place mo re emphasis on words or phrases the swimmers 
would use and this would indicate injury to them . Examples given were pain, sharp, or sore. 
Using VRS scale 
The VRS works by asking a person to rate an experience, such as pain on a scale of 0 to 10.  The 
limits of the scale are set as 0 meaning no pain at  all to 10 being the wo rst pain imaginable. The 
VRS was used in two ways by coaches.  Firstly, it was used to measure the workload and 
intensity of the training session, so the coach can assess if the swimmer is meeting their objective 
for the swimming session they have set out. 
C5 “It’s trying to teach them now like what is an injury and what’s not an injury.”  
C5:  So, an intensity of the training session of how hard they felt the two hours was. So, in two hours out of 
ten how hard was that whole thing. This morning (training session) was probably around four or five for most of them… A four or five to me is still trainable.   
C1: “1 -10 scale, I more use the numbers one to 10 for like effort, and how they feel in terms of soreness. 
That's sort of overall at the end of training.” 
The VRS was also used by coaches as a way fo r the coaches to have their swimmers measure 
their pain. 
C2: Well, I would ask them on a scale of one to ten how sore it is.  “What number would you have to reach 
before you both decided?” “Six or seven” 
Key words 
Al
so fitting with the theme of differentiating training pain and injury coaches would put higher 
emphasis on key words to indicate injury. These key words or phrases would be picked up 
during conversation with the swimmers.  This gives insight into how coaches interpret the 
perceptions of their athletes and also help identify if they are training while injured. 
38 C2 “That's why I use achy and sore, like achy or sharp. Because if they describe it as a sharp pain I know 
it's more serious than an achy pain because achy muscles is just a sign of them getting stronger “ “Also 
comes back to getting them to understand their body and like their pain tolerance.” 
C3 “we talk about sharp pain and dull pain a lot. And that's kind of our, our scale to know if something's 
serious or not.” 
C4 “If they're like "I've got such and such niggle." I say "Okay, is it sore or is it painful? Can you keep 
swimming or what do you think? Is it too painful to swim, or it's just sore but you're not doing anything 
wrong."  
S
ubtheme 1d: When do coaches intervene: 
There was two key instances when coaches would intervene or approach a swimmer to see if 
they were in pain or discomfort. This was th rough direct observation or when a swimmer would 
approach talk about the pain they were experiencing. 
Observation 
Some of the coaches mentioned that there are occasions where they observe a difference when 
the swimmers are in the water.  If they ha d noticed a difference in someone’s swimming 
technique or performance or if they were avoi ding particular tasks, they would then start a 
conversation with the swimmer. 
C1 “Oh yeah, by body language, they're swimming slower than normal… why?” There's a few things that, 
yeah, when swimming that you can see they avoid maybe doing something or they're not pushing off the wall properly. "Why are you not doing a turn?" "Oh, I've got a sore back.” 
 C5: You see them so often you can pick up on it pretty quickly, you know? Or, you’ll just say to them, “Look, 
you need to make sure you’re retaining a little bit more through the hips and that line or actually a bit tighter 
through it. And, that’s usually when it’s, “I did but I was a bit sore.” It’s usually at that point that they feed 
back to me on that. And, okay well just feel what you’re doing to keep inside the range that it’s not sore. 
39 When a swimmer talks to them 
The most common way that coaches would be in formed of injuries occurring was when the 
swimmer told them directly.  As one coach good-humoredly summarized “first I tell them they 
need to communicate because I can't read minds!”  There were many times throughout the interviews 
where the coaches would give examples of, “if they mention”  or “if they say”  when talking 
about swimmers informing them.   This gave the impression that the coaches felt the swimmers 
could approach them openly to discuss injuries or discomfort they were  feeling. There was no 
formal process that the athletes had to go through, in order to discuss issues with the coaches.  
 C5: So, it’s usually just a verbal communication, usually before the session or if it’s not before the session 
it’s usually during the session if we’re doing something or like doesn’t quite feel right or this is a little bit 
sore at the time and they’ll stop. 
C1: but I'm not going to tell you off for coming to tell me that you're injured or sick. (This coach was 
talking in the context of the younger swimmers) 
Theme t
wo: Self-reported actions 
There were three main self-reported actions repo rted by the coaches.  For this study, self-
reported actions were established as behavior s and actions coaches took when they had 
knowledge that one of their athletes were injure d.  These three actions are program adaptation, 
giving management advice, or refe rring to a health care practitioner.  There is overlap of these 
three actions, where all three may occur simultaneou sly or there may be shift between these three 
actions, where coaches would re-visit one action mo re than once.  These actions are flexible and 
would be utilized in any order depending on the swimmer and the individual injury they were 
presenting with. 
40 Fi
gure 5: Self-reported actions 
Subtheme 2a: Program adaptation 
Program adaptation was the code given for the ex amples coaches gave where they changed the 
training session to match the abilities of the swimmer during a period of injury.  The main 
examples of program adaptation were adjusting th e intensity and duration of training sessions.  
C1: "Look, do warm up," you know it might be 200 meters. Just see what happens. If it hurts, stop, if it 
doesn't hurt then figure out what does hurt and then we'll just avoid it for a wee while. Generally it turns 
into, if it's a shoulder, turns into kick with fins and drill or- or whatever until we can figure it out. 
C2: (example “sore shoulder”) If they say "sore" I just get them to do kicks. You know, streamline, and 
stretch out. Or just do one arm, do that sort of stuff. 
C4: Most of them will just adjust it. I've got one kid at the moment with a shoulder injury, who has no idea  
she did. If it's shoulder related we'll do kick, or with fins. Stuff to take the pressure off. …It's quite easy to 
manage a kid doing something slightly different. 
C2: “So just gradually so if they've had six weeks out, say, for a broken arm I’ll say maybe just do all the 
mornings that first week and then just progressively get them back in. The quicker you can get them back 
with monitoring the easier it is. And I also made sure that they keep doing exercise out of the pool to keep 
their fitness level up”  

41 Subtheme 2b: Self-management advice 
This theme developed from the ‘rehabilitation an d self-management’ suggestions and advice the 
coaches would give swimmers if they mentioned they  were sore or injured. It appears that this 
advice comes from the ongoing learning and experience the coaches develop throughout their 
careers.  Participants appear to be reliant on their career experience when recommending 
exercises and stretches and will make suggestions  of things the swimmers should be using or 
doing to either prevent or manage their pain.  The key examples of advice were stretching and 
making rehabilitation tools available for the athletes to use.   
Examples of exercise advice given by coaches: 
C2: I go straight into rehab, uh, rehab with therabands bands and stretching. Make sure they pre-empt 
rather than post-empt it.” ”And do you do that within your training sessions?” “Yeah. I also tell them to do 
it at home. Because yeah, the more you do it, the better.” 
For some of the coaches they expressed it was important for the swimmer to take accountability 
for incorporating the warm-up and stretching  routines for both injury prevention and 
management. 
C4: We've got stretch bands, foam rollers, massage balls and stuff. They know they've got them, they just 
have to want to use them. We've spent the last year working on stretching routines to do before trainings. 
They don't do it, but they know that they have the options. The majority of them, especially in the 
afternoons, they turn up a good 20 minutes early. They know that they have the option. . They do need the 
encouragement.  
C3:  We try and put the accountability on the athlete to execute that plan…we want them to take 
responsibility and accountability and make sure that they are doing it- doing their piece- Um, and then if 
there's things we see, and patterns that we see that are causing those injuries, then we'll look at drills that 
can help fix that. Or equipment.  
42 Subtheme 2c: Referral 
The subtheme of referral reflects when coaches highly recommend or suggest that one of their 
swimmers sees a health care provider. This step had a close relationship or link to subtheme 2b 
as it would be the ‘next step’ the coaches woul d take if the swimmers further mentioned they 
were not feeing improvement from suggested stretches or exercises the coaches had 
recommended.  The coaches interv iewed for this study would suggest seeing manual therapist. A 
common finding was that the participants were more likely to suggest their swimmers see a 
manual therapist they have worked with before. The examples mentioned most frequently were 
Osteopaths and Physiotherapists.  
C2 “ I would ask them where it's sore, whether the pain is achy or sharp and then tell me if they've been 
doing their stretching, their thera-band, and then we give it twenty-four or forty-eight hours and then I 
refer to the physio.”  
C4: I'll have someone say, "My shoulder is a bit sore. Can you just look at what my technique is doing, and 
make sure I'm not doing anything wrong?" That's the first thing, and then I say "Are you doing any 
stretching or exercise or anything like that." And we do that. If it's not better then we're going to go to the 
physio. 
Theme three: Communication with Health care practitioners  
Before the interviewing process, it was decided that the researcher would use the term ‘manual 
therapist’ so the coaches could talk about their experiences with physiotherapists, chiropractors, 
massage therapists, and osteopaths. During the in terviews, there were times where the coaches 
would talk about “specialists”.  Their use of the term specialist meant other health care providers 
their swimmers may have been referred to, from the involved manual therapist. Because the 
involvement of specialists was no t originally considered by the researcher at the outset of the 
research, during the data analysis process it  was decided the generic term ‘health care 
practitioners’ would be used to describe the pa rticipants’ experiences and perceptions of both 
specialists and manual therapists (i.e. physiothera pists, chiropractors, massage therapists, and 
osteopaths).  For this chapter th e term specialist is used when  quoted by the participants and 
specific practitioner types are named when they were  used directly by the participant.  It was also 
43 common that the participants used shortened titles to indicate certain health care practitioners, for 
example “Physio” means physiotherap ist and “Osteo” means osteopath. 
Coaches were most likely to re ceive information from health care  practitioners indirectly. This 
information is usually conveyed to the coach by the swimmer or their parents depending on the age of the athlete. There were occasions where coaches would talk directly with healthcare providers and they were more likely to interact with a health care provider they had worked with previously and built up a working relationship with.   
Figure 6: Communication with  health care practitioners. 
Subtheme 3a: Indirectly, through the swimmer 
Communication is usually through the swimmer. Swimmers would talk with their coaches either 
before or during a training session regarding an injury, it was the same for passing on 
information from their health pr actitioners to the coaches.   
C3 “we'll make sure that there's a three-way kind of communication from the physio or the doctor or the 
osteo, whoever it is. Just the coach and the athlete, so we're all on the same page. Coz, um, there are some 

44 athletes that will milk an injury a lot longer than they need to. But there's some athletes that will rush an 
injury faster than they need to. And if there's not that transparency of what the situation is, and what the 
recommendations is, it's kind of like, throwing darts in the dark. …Um, yeah, that communication's the first 
piece- what the plan is. And we just go off the plan. We try and put the accountability on the athlete to 
execute that plan.” 
C4: “Generally speaking, it would be, I will tell the kid to go, and book in with the physio, and they go and 
see them… Generally the feedback comes through the swimmer.”  
Subtheme 3b: Indirectly, through the parents 
The youngest swimmers that coaches had in their club s were 8 years old.  These swimmers would be in 
development squads.  Due to swimmers being under the age of 18 years they were considered to be 
minors and therefore the coaches would have conversati ons with their parents regarding their treatment 
with health care providers. 
C4: The swimmer will see the physio, either by them self  or with the parent. Either the kid or the parent 
will come back to me and say this is what they've said.  
C3: (Will speak to the parent) “On pick up and drop off. …We see them, we're talking with them, and 
checking in, feedback. Where's it at? Are you feeling like you're improving? What's, what's going 
backwards? How's physio going? How's your exercises going? All that stuff, we're gonna communicate 
with them.” 
S
ubtheme 3c: Directly, with health care providers. 
There were occasions where the coaches would talk  directly with health care practitioners.  The 
participant would ask for general advice or information when they may be concerned about a 
swimmer. The situations where this would occur was if there was a health care practitioner 
(typically a physiotherapist) based at their aquatic centre, or if they had a good working 
relationship with a local health care practitioner who was happy for them to call with general 
questions.  This links strongly to subthemes 1d observation and 2c referral, where coaches may 
45 observe a swimmer moving differently, or if they fe lt it may be necessary for the swimmer to see 
a manual therapist. 
C4:  “I have a good relationship with one of the physios [locally] mainly because she's treated me for a lot 
of years. She's quite good. If I have any questions, she'll help me” 
C4: “In terms of if I was to talk to a physio, I'd say "I'm just a little bit worried about this swimmer. Can 
you just make sure we're on the same page and I know what's going on?” 
C2: “And do you refer to the same physio?” “The same, yeah. I try and get them to see the one that's 
started with me because I know she does it [treats] really well.” 
C1: “so I sent him to osteo and he helped him out with something that he had.” “so my advice [is] from the 
osteo, because I talk to him quite a bit.” 
Swimmers being referred to specialists.  
Some Participants expressed uncertainty about at hletes being referred to specialists. Manual 
therapists may refer an athlete for medical imag ing or to a specialist for further diagnostic 
investigations. As the coaches are not frequently in  touch with the health care practitioners, they 
seemed unsure as to why some of the sw immers needed these further interventions. 
C1 “In the past mainly with older kids, specialists, and then next minute they're talking, um, injections and 
surgery and they're quite keen on that because they... you don't need that, you know.” 
C2 “And their sort of solution was just cortisone, cortisone, cortisone.” 
C2 “Half the time I hear people that have ultrasounds, they show the very bare minimum as opposed to a 
MRI … I've got one swimmer with a little niggly shoulder at the moment and the physio's got an ultrasound 
and before he went I said, "Oh, you'll have tendinitis or bursitis" and then he came back to me. "Oh, you 
were right”"  
C5: “Again, I think around different practitioners, I think you know, everyone has a different opinion on a 
different injury which is another area which becomes a little bit frustrating as a coach, because you don’t 
really know what it is.” 
46 Chapter 5  
Discussion  
Chapter overview 
This chapter discusses the three themes identified in chapter four and considers how these 
findings link to the current research, with particular focus on topics outlined in the literature 
review. The themes are discussed in the same orde r as they are presented in chapter four. These 
are: coaches’ perceptions of injury, self-reporte d actions, and communication with health care 
providers. This chapter also discusses the implic ations, limitations, and potential further lines of 
research from this study. 
Coaches’ perceptions of injury 
The participants appear to perceive that there are multi-causal factors that lead to injury. Their 
perception of injury gave emphasis to unfores een events that happened away from the pool such 
as spraining joints, breaking bones, or falls wh ich were then further aggravated by swimming. 
This fits with the overarching definition of sporting injury where the tissues of the body are 
stressed beyond their structural and functional abilities (Fuller 2009). 
Looking at the three factors in Meeuwisse’s aetiology model (figure 1), the participants’ 
perception of injury also aligns with this model as they seem to consider that a swimmer may be 
more susceptible to experiencing symptoms when swimming if they have had a recent previous injury or trauma.   Brukner and Khan (2014) discuss sports injuries as being either acute injuries 
that happen quickly from direct trauma, or over use injuries caused by repeated movement.  There 
is currently emerging recognition of swimming in juries which were outlined in the literature 
review as ‘swimmers shoulder’ and ‘swimmers knee’.  
Where the participants’ perception of injury di ffered from the current literature was that there 
was minimal mention of overuse injuries as a direct  result of swimming. During the interviews it 
was discussed that swimming can continue to irr itate an injured region of the body, however, 
there was little emphasis on swimming and repe titive movements causing injury directly. 
47 Self-reported actions 
The treatment and management protocols mention ‘activity modification’ as a key phase when 
managing an injury.  Coaches have a pivotal role in this stage of the management plan as they 
schedule and monitor training frequency and the in tensity of the training sessions (Denison & 
Anver, 2011). From the interviews there were two key actions that the participants discussed that 
fit within this step of rehabilitation. The first ke y action is assessment of training thresholds and 
adapting the training program if necessary. The second is that they will utilize warm-up exercises and stretching to target regions that the swimmers report as symptomatic. 
An example from the findings was how the coaches had tools that they used to communicate 
with their swimmers to measure training thresholds. Training thresholds are important to monitor 
as it informs the coach and athlete when they are ready to increase training duration and intensity 
and if they are on track for their competition goals (Windt & Gabbett, 2016). Traditionally in 
swimming, coaches will measure improvement throug h achieving a set distance in a certain time. 
The coaches gave the following information that they would evaluate the times the swimmers 
were making at swim meets or practices and this  would help them to assess their progression. 
The common example explored in this study wa s the VRS rating tool used between coach and 
athlete to communicate threshold perceptions during training sessions. This also gave the coach a 
gauge about whether the athletes’ perception of training threshold was matching the coach.  The 
VRS scale was also used by coaches as a way of communicating and interpreting if the swimmers were reporting general training discom fort, which was discussed as indicating body 
adaptation, compensation, and increased fitness. 
The participants for this study discussed that their swimming squads were given a warm-up and 
stretching plan to complete before entering the pool.  Racinais et al (2017) discuss that warming 
up the body before training can improve muscle length and range of motion while also raising 
the heart rate and ventilation. They also explain that this activation before training can prepare 
and stimulate the athlete to withstand traini ng by enhancing their functional capacity. 
The general pattern for the participants in this study was to ensure that swimmers who mentioned 
they were sore were completin g their warm-up and stretching activities and would advise or 
recommend the swimmer use certain stretches or movements fr om the warm-up routine more 
48 frequently, for example at home and on non-trainin g days.  If there was no reported improvement 
from the swimmer, they would then suggest seeing a manual therapist. 
Communication with health care providers 
The line of communication described by the participants between the coaches and health care 
providers strongly matched the example raised by Brukner and Khan (2014) as described in the 
literature review. Brukner and Khan’s descrip tion was that communication most likely came 
through the athlete. It appears to be uncommon for coaches and manual therapists to communicate directly, although there were occasions where a coach may organise a phone discussion or request an email with fu rther information if it was necessary. 
An interesting point to come from the interviews is that the participants were more likely to 
recommend their swimmers see a manual therapist they have seen themselves for treatment or 
experienced good outcomes with their swimmers pr eviously.  A positively established working 
rapport was important for the coaches. 
At the time of interviewing the researcher deci ded to use the term manual therapist so the 
coaches could discuss their experiences with ph ysiotherapists, chiropractors, osteopaths and 
massage therapists. At the time of the interviews  the researcher had not anticipated specialists 
and sports doctors would also be discussed within  the interviews. However, some of the coaches 
discussed when their swimmers informed them that they had been referred to see a specialist, 
which lead to the use of the term ‘health care provider’ in this study, to also explore and include 
the partipants perception of specialists as well as manual therapists.  
It was interesting that although coaches had positi ve perceptions of manual therapists and their 
management advice to swimmers regarding injury , they did indicate some apprehension when 
recounting previous experiences when their sw immers had been referred to specialists. The 
researcher’s interpretation from the participants was that the coaches who expressed concern that 
swimmers were being referred to specialists too quickly before the athlete had time to heal and 
adapt to the current intervention.  
49 Implications from this study 
This study provided insight into the percepti ons of swimming coaches regarding swimming 
injuries and their perceptions of management and rehabilitation of injured swimmers.  It 
demonstrated that swim coaches associate injuries as events that are more likely to happen away 
from the pool but are likely to be further aggravated by swim training.  The participants in this 
study had a clear understanding of injury manage ment and had developed protocols to change 
the volume and intensity of training to aid the swimmer with their rehabilitation.  Essentially, 
they would match training to their temporarily impaired training level. This study shows there is 
an emphasis placed on the nurturing of co ach and athlete communication, but less on 
professional communication between coac hes and health care practitioners.  This research shows 
that there is potential for further professional development of swim coaches understanding of 
swimming related injuries and there is a capac ity to enhance the sharing of information and 
communication between health ca re practitioners and coaches regarding the management and 
rehabilitation of swimming athletes.  
Further research 
There is potential to extend this study by interviewing other groups such as the swimmers or 
health care practitioners to explore their percep tions of swimming injuries and the management 
of these.  It would also be beneficial to compar e these groups perceptions to see if they align or 
differ. 
From this study there are possibilities to further explore swimming coaches’ perceptions of 
injuries occurring directly from swimming as this was not fully explored in this study.  For 
example, one area to explore further would be  swim coaches perceptio ns on specialists in 
contrast to manual therapists. 
50 Limitations  
The sample of participants for this study was small and did not meet the initially set target of 8 to 
10 participants.  This came down to two key re asons. The first was a lack of responses to the 
invitation and the researcher had not anticipated th e length of time it would take to get responses. 
The researcher sent a second follow-up email to coaches who had not responded to the first 
within two weeks, which helped generate replies.   The second reason was a lack of resources, 
essentially time, where it was unrealistic for the researcher to continue to collect responses 
within the necessary timeline of completing the thesis. 
Another limitation was the researcher’s lack of experience with interviewing. There were lost 
opportunities to explore more deeply for furthe r information regarding when participants brought 
up topics the researcher did not in itially have at the start of the project.  An example of this was 
not exploring further why swim coaches showed apprehension when a swimmer was referred to 
a specialist.  On self-reflection the researcher realised they had a strong reliance on the interview 
guideline and was not skilled enough to be more flexible and pick up quicker on these cues to 
explore the data further. 
Conclusion 
The participants’ perceptions of injuries are in line with current research as they demonstrated an 
understanding and perception of acute injuries be ing cause by an inciting trauma.  It was their 
perception that injuries occurred out of the pool and were brought into swim training and further 
aggravated from the repetitive nature of swimmi ng. There was little perception or discussion of 
injuries occurring directly because of swimming as there was little mention of the possible chronic overloading of the body from the repetitive tasks performed in all disciplines of 
swimming.  This finding differs from current re search which was discus sed in the literature 
review.  The literature review outlined thre e common overuse injuries seen in swimming, 
swimmers shoulder, swimmers knee, and back pa in, although there were no mention of these 
diagnoses in the interviews. There is a possibility that the participants have not had a swimmer specifically diagnosed with these swimming rela ted injuries and this could explain why they 
were not discussed by the participants.   
51 The participants discussed their actions for ma naging injured swimmers, including monitoring 
and adjusting, usually by decreasing the intens ity, duration, frequency of training sessions while 
the athlete was injured. These participants would follow advice from manual therapists with the 
most common examples being halting certain task s in a short-term capacity to let the swimmer 
heal and increasing the training workload when  recommended by the health care practitioner. 
Their management strategies are in line with guidelines and have shown that coaches play a key 
role in activity modification required in rehabilitation plans. 
Communication between coaches and health care  practitioners usually occurs through the 
swimmer.  The participants from this study tend ed to find this an appropriate way to receive 
information as there was emphasis on the swi mmer taking accountability for their injury and 
recovery.  The coaches tended to agree with the recommendations made by health care providers 
and had the experience to incorporate them into their training plans.  
52 References: 
Adiele, D., & Morgan, G. P. (2018). Prevalence of musculoskeletal injuries in males and females practicing  
swimming from higher school of Zimbabwe. A merican Journal of Sports Science , 6(1), 8-11. 
Aetiology, Retrieved from, Oxford Medical Dictionary (9th ed.)  
 https://www.oxfordreference.com   
Bak, K. (2010). The practical management of swimmer's painful shoulder: etiology, diagnosis, and 
 treatment. Clinical Journal of Sport Medicine , 20(5), 386-390. 
Bompa, T., & Buzzichelli, C. (2015). Periodization training for sports, 3e . Human kinetics.  
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative research in  psychology , 3(2), 
77-101.
Brinkmann, S. (2013). Qualitative interviewing . Oxford University Press. 
Britannica, T. Editors of Encyclopaedia (2020, April 16). Swimming. Encyclopedia Britannica . 
 https://www.britannica.com/sports/swimming-sport  
Brukner, P., Khan, K., & Brukner, P. (2014).  Brukner & Khan's clinical sports medicine . (4th ed.) Sydney: 
 McGraw-Hill. 
Carcary, M. (2020) "The Research Audit Trail: Methodological Guidance for Application in Practice." Electronic 
Journal  on Business Research Methods , vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 166-77.  
Carter, S., & Henderson, L. (2005). Approaches to qualitative data collection in social science. Handbook of 
health research methods: Investigation, measurement and analysis , 1, 21 5-230. 
Chartard, J., & Stewart, A. M. (2011). Training load and performance in swimming. World Book of Swimming: 
From Science to Performance . 
Chesebro, J. W., & Borisoff, D. J. (2007). What makes qualitative research qualitative?. Qualitative research 
 reports in communication , 8(1), 3-14. 
Cypress, B. S. (2017). Rigor or Reliability and Validity in Qualitative Research: Perspectives, Strategies, 
Reconceptualization, and Recommendations. Rese arch dimension . 
De Martino, I., & Rodeo, S. A. (2018). The swimmer’s shoulder: multi-directional instability. Current reviews 
 in musculoskeletal medicine , 11(2), 167-171. 
Denison, J., & Avner, Z. (2011). Positive coaching: Ethical practices for athlete development. Quest , 63(2), 209-
 227. 
Dick, F. W. (2014). Sports training principles  (6th ed.). London: Bloomsbury publishing.  
53 Etikan, I., Musa, S. A., & Alkassim, R. S. (2016). Comparison of convenience sampling and purposive 
 sampling. American journal of theoretical and applied statistics , 5(1), 1-4. 
FINA swimming rules 2017-2021, Retrieved from, 
 https://resources.fina.org/fina/document/2021/01/12/b3885f9b-630a-4390-861d-
 4e7f6031f4a4/2017_2021_swimming_16032018.pdf 
Fuller, C. W., Ekstrand, J., Junge, A., Andersen, T. E., Bahr, R., Dvorak, J., & Meeuwisse, W. H. (2006). 
Consensus statement on injury definitions and data collection procedures in studies of football (soccer) 
 injuries. Scandinavian journal of medicine & science in sports , 16(2), 83-92. 
Havriluk, R. (2013). Seasonal variations in swimming force and training adaptation. Journal of Swimming 
 Research , 21(1). 
Headley-Cooper, K. J. (2010). Coaches’ Perspectives on Athlete-Centred Coaching  (Master's thesis). 
Health Practitioners Competence Assurance Act 2003, Retrieved from, 
 https://www.legislation.govt.nz/act/public/2003/0048/latest/DLM203312.html 
Hefzollesan, M., Tofighi, A., Qarakhanlou, B. J., & Ghalehgir, S. (2014). The relationship of breaststroke  training 
on knee pain and Q angle of breaststroke and crawl swimmers. Central European Journal of  Sport Sciences 
and Medicine , 2(3). 
Kerr, G., Stirling, A., & Gurgis, J. (2018). An athlete-centred approach to enhance thriving within athletes and 
 coaches. Perspectives on athlete-centred coaching , 24-35.  
Kidman, L. (2005). Athlete-centred coaching: Developing inspired and inspiring people . Christchurch: IPC 
 Print Resources. 
Korstjens, I., & Moser, A. (2018). Series: Practical guidance to qualitative research. Part 4: Trustworthiness and 
 publishing. European Journal of General Practice , 24(1), 120-124. 
Krageloh, C. (2008). Research methods and statistics in the health sciences  (pp. 547-605). Australia: McGraw-Hill. 
Magee, D. J., & Quillen, W. S, Zachazewski. (1996). Athletic injuries and rehabilitation . WB Saunders 
 company. 
Malterud, K., Siersma, V. D., & Guassora, A. D. (2015, November 27). Sample size in qualitative interview studies: 
Guided by information power. Qualitative health research.  
Meeuwisse, W. H., Tyreman, H., Hagel, B., & Emery, C. (2007). A dynamic model of etiology in sport injury: 
the recursive nature of risk and causation. Cl inical Journal of Sport Medicine , 17(3), 215-219. 
Mitchell, J. (2013). Athlete centred coaching. Retrieved from https://coachgrowth.wordpress.com 
54 New Zealand Olympic organization, swimming medal statistics. Retrieved from  
https://www.olympic.org.nz/sports/swimming 
Nyska, M., Constantini, N., & Cale-Benzoor, M. (2000). Spondylolysis as a cause of low back pain in 
 swimmers. International journal of sports medicine , 21(5), 375-379. 
O'Connor, F. G., Howard, T. M., Fieseler, C. M., & Ni rschl, R. P. (1997). Managing overuse injuries: a 
 systematic approach. The Physician and sportsmedicine , 25(5), 88-113. 
Olivos, M. E., & Tate, A (2016). Coaches' Education and Practices Regarding Overuse Injury in  Youth 
Swimming. Journal of Swimming Research , 24(1). 
Pollard, H., & Fernandez, M. (2004). Spinal musculoskeletal injuries associated with swimming: a discussion of 
 technique. Australasian Chiropractic & Osteopathy , 12(2), 72. 
Pyne, D. (2001). Training progression for younger age group swimmers. Australian Institute of Sport 
 Reproduced from The Swimmer . 
Racinais, S., Cocking, S., & Périard, J.  D. (2017). Sports and environmental temperature: from warming-up to 
 heating-up. Temperature , 4(3), 227-257. 
Rodeo, S. A. (1999). Knee pain in competitive swimming. Clinics in sports medicine , 18(2), 379-387. 
Schmidt, C. (2004). The analysis of semi-structured interviews. A companion to qualitative research , 253, 258. 
Short, S. E., & Short, M. W. (2005). Essay: Role of the coach in the coach-athlete relationship. The Lancet , 366 , 
 S29-S30. 
Swimming New Zealand, 2020 https://www.swimming.org.nz/ 
Swimming, New Zealand Olympic team. Retrieved June 1, 2020, from   
 https://www.olympic.org.nz/sports/swimming/, 
Thompson-Burdine, J., Thorne, S., & Sandhu, G. (2021). Interpretive description: a flexible qualitative 
methodology for medical education research. M edical Education , 55(3), 336-343. 
Thorne, S., Kirkham, S. R., & O'Flynn-Magee, K. (2004). The analytic challenge in interpretive 
 description. International journal of qualitative methods , 3(1), 1-11. 
Thorne, S. (2016). Interpretive description: Qualitative research for applied practice . Routledge. 
Windt, J., & Gabbett, T. J. (2017). How do training and competition workloads relate to injury? The workload—
 injury aetiology model. British Journal of Sports Medicine , 51(5), 428-435. 
Wanivenhaus, F., Fox, A. J., Chaudhury, S., & Rodeo, S. A. (2012). Epidemiology of injuries and prevention 
strategies in competitive swimmers. Sp orts health , 4(3), 246-251. 
55 Vila Dieguez, O., & Barden, J. M. (2020). Body roll differences in freestyle swimming between swimmers with 
and without shoulder pain. S ports Biomechanics , 1-14. 
56 Appendix A: Information sheet 
In
formation  for participants  
Research  Project Tit
le 
Attitudes  and beliefs of New Zealand swim coaches towards swimming  related injury 
prevention,  treatment  and management.  
Synopsis  of project 
This project is wanting to explore the attitudes and  beliefs of swim coaches in New Zealand towards 
swimming  related overuse injuries (more commonly  known as ‘swimmer’s  shoulder’  or ‘swi mmer’s  knee’) 
and what coaches do if their swimmers  do have an overuse injury. 
This information  is important  to health care practitioners,  as it can help with their understanding  of the 
cause of these  injuries and how to put together better prevention  and rehabilitation  plans if they  treat 
injured swimmers.  
What  we ar
e doing 
‐ We are inviting Swim coaches who are associated  to swimming  New Zealand clubs to have a 
conversation  (interview)  with the researcher  of this project regarding  swimming  overuse injuries in 
competitive  swimmers.  
‐ These  interviews  will be transcribed  for the researcher,  who is interested  in identifying  any co mmon  
themes that can be drawn from  the individual  interviews. 

57 ‐ On
ce the researcher  has analyzed the interviews,  the results will be written up and published  as a 
thesis paper, which is required  for the Masters of Osteopathy.   
What  it will mean for you 
By taking part in this project, you will be asked to participate  in one interview  wit h the researcher.   The 
interview  will last approximately  1hr. 
You will be given a copy  of your transcribed  interview  to read and you will then have the opportunity  to 
clarify any statements  you have made in the interview.  
If you agree to participate,  you will be asked to sign a consent form. Th is does  not stop you from changing 
your mind if you wish to withdraw  from  the project. However,  because of our schedule,  any withdrawals  
must  be done  within 2 weeks after  we have interviewed  you. 
Your name and information  that may identify you will be kept completely  confidential.  All informati on 
collected from  you will be stored on a password  protected  file and only you, the researcher  and two 
supervisors  will have access to this information. 
Please  contact us if you need  more information  about the project. At any time if you have any concerns 
about the research project you ca n contact our supervisor:  
My supervisor  is Rob Moran, phone 815‐4321 ext. ________  or email rmoran@unitec.ac.nz  
UREC  REGISTRATION  NUMBER:  2019‐1012 
This study has been approved  by the UNITEC Research Ethics Committee  from  (17th April  2019) to (17th April 
2020) .  If you have any complaints  or reservations  about  the ethical conduct of this research,  you may 
contact the Committee  through the UREC Secretary  (ph: 09 815‐4321 ext 8551).  Any issues  you raise will 
be treated in confidence  and investigated  fully, and you will be informed  of the outcome.  
58 Appendix B: Email invitation 
Hello, 
My name is Amy and I am an Osteopathy student at Unitec Auckland.  I am currently working on 
a thesis looking at injury prevention and managem ent of swimmers.  I am interested in hearing 
from swim coaches on their beliefs and knowledge on this topic. 
I am inviting coaches from your competitive swim club to be interviewed, to discuss their beliefs 
and opinions of the current landscape of swimming injury management. (Please note this will be 
very informal, more of a good discussion or c hat!) The interview will only take 1hour of your 
time. 
I have attached an information sheet which outlines my  thesis project in more detail.  Thank you 
for taking the time to read this and I look forward to hearing from you soon. I do hope you take 
my invitation to discuss this topic for my thesis. 
Kind Regards, 
Amy Tinneny-Phillips 
(Masters of Osteopathy student.) 
59 Appendix C: Interview Guide 
Introduction checklist: 
‐ 
Introduce myself. Thank participant for agreeing to take part in interview.  
‐ Set the scene:  This interview is part of my research project, as part of the Masters of 
Osteopathy programme at Unitec.  I am want ing to investigate the relationship between 
manual health practitioners and swim coaches.  
‐ Gain consent that the participant is happy and agrees to conversation being recorded.  
‐ Turn recorder on. 
‐ Confirm that participant has received and read (and understood) information sheet.  
‐ Sign consent form. (2 copies – 1 for them to keep, one for researcher.)  
‐ Outline the process: 
‐  I will be asking questions as I am intere sted in getting swim coaches views on the 
development of swimming injuries and how to manage them.  
‐ You are invited to answer these as openly as you wish, the more information the 
better.  
‐ We can pause the interview at any time, if you need too.  
‐ Your name and any identifying details will be kept confidential.  
‐ I may take some written notes as the interview goes on, so I can follow up on any 
points of interest.  
‐ Prompt interviewee: Can you think of one or two examples – maybe a swimmer going 
through or returning from injury. A swimmer you learnt a lot from? (we will get to this later 
in the interview)  
60 Question prompts: 
Icebreak
er questions: 
‐ How long have you been coaching for? 
‐ What got you into swim coaching? 
‐ Did you swim yourself?  | How long did you swim  for?  | were you a competitive swimmer? 
‐ What age range do you coach? – may not be needed if we find ACC data for most reported 
age group for injury. 
‐ What competitive level do you coach? – may not be needed if we find ACC data for most 
reported age group for injury. 
Approach to coaching: 
‐ Could you describe your approach to coaching? 
‐ What are your core coaching values? 
‐ What influences your coaching? (A certain person or experiences?) 
‐ For the division or age group you coach, ho w many training sessions will they be doing? 
‐ Do you have a training season? (Periodisation?) 
‐ How do you structure your training season for the swimmers? (Aim for certain swim 
meets or events etc.?) 
‐ Can you give a quick overview of how you structure you training 
sessions/programmes? (Technique, time trials, distance, building intensity etc.?) 
‐ How do you progress your swimmers through the season? (What are the goals to 
“move up”?  What does it mean on your club to move up?) 
Approach to injuries: 
‐ Do the swimmers mention to you if they have any niggles or soreness? 
‐ What areas of the body do they mention? 
‐ How do your swimmers let you know they may be injured? (reporting injuries) 
‐ What do you expect to be normal “training” aches or soreness? 
‐ Are you able to pick up on the way the move or act, or things they say, that may indicate 
their discomfort is more than a training ache? (How do you know they are injured?) 
61 ‐ 
When problems arise, how do you and the swimmer deal/address these? 
‐ Does this become a problem for future training sessions? 
‐ Do you think there is a time during the training schedule that swimmers are more 
vulnerable to injury? 
‐ Training load throughout the season? 
‐ Certain age group? – may not be need to ask. 
‐ Specialising in a certain discipline? 
‐ If you could “write the recipe” for a swimmi ng injury to happen – what would your key 
ingredients be? 
‐ Would you ever or have you suggested that a swimmer see a manual therapist for their 
discomfort? 
Impression/knowledge of manual therapy: 
‐ What forms of manual therapy do you know of?  
‐ Have you ever had any communication with a manual therapist about one of your 
swimmers? 
‐ Letter with advice for the swimmer? | Phonecall? | in-person conversation? 
‐ Would you like to hear from manual therapists about your swimmers? 
Managing injuries in swimmers: 
‐ How have you managed injuries in the past?  
‐ Are there any strategies or a ‘management plan’ that you, or the club have in place if a 
swimmer is injured?  
‐ How do coaches learn/gain knowledge about injuries in swimmers? | How to manage 
injuries?  
‐ Have you been offered any further education (professional development) about managing 
injuries?   
‐ Would you be interested in any oppor tunities to learn more about swimming 
injuries? 
‐ How do you introduce an injured swimmer back into training from injury? 
62 ‐ 
Is there a protocol (e.g: start with less training sessions/ shorter training sessions 
etc?) 
‐ Are you able to adjust training programmes on the day, for the week or month, for an 
injured swimmer?  
Case examples: 
‐ Can you think of an example of a swimmer you worked with, that you learnt about 
managing an injury through training?  
Conclusion: 
‐ Is there anything else you would like to add or  discuss on any of the topics we have 
covered? 
Thank participant for their time and stop and save re cording.
63 Appendix D: Participant consent form               
Participant Consent Form  
 Research Project Title: 
Attitudes and beliefs of New Zealand swim coaches on swimming related injury 
prevention, treatm ent and management. 
I have had the research project explained to me and I have read and understand the 
information sheet given to me.  
I understand that I don't have to be part of this research project should I chose not to participate 
and may withdraw at any time prior to the completion of the research project. 
I understand that everything I say is confidential and n one of the information I give will identify me 
and that the only persons who will know what  I have said will be the researchers and their 
supervisor. I also understand t hat all the information that I give will be stored securely on a computer 
at Unitec for a period of 10 years. I understand that my discussion with the researcher will be taped and transcribed. 
I understand that I can see the finished research document. 
I have had time to consider everything and I give my consent to be a part of this project.  
Participant Name: …………………………………………………………………….....  
Participant Signature: ………………………….. Date: …………………………… 

64 Projec
t Researcher: ……………………………. Date: …………………………… 
UREC REGISTRATION NUMBER: 2019-1012 
This study has been approved by the UNITEC Research Ethics Committee from 17/04/2019  to 
17/04/2020 .  If you have any complaints or reservations about the ethical conduct of this research, 
you may contact the Committee through the UREC Secretary (ph: 09 815-4321 ext 8551). Any 
issues you raise will be treated in confidence and in vestigated fully, and you will be informed of the 
outcome.
65 Appendix E:  ACC Statistic information 
This information was requested and received via email. 

