Subject Review 
Musculoskeletal Injuries in Competitive Swimmers 
JEFFREY E. JOHNSON, M.D.,* Resident in  Orthopedics;  FRANKLIN H. SIM, M.D., Department  of 
Orthopedics;  STEVEN G. SCOTT, D.O., Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation 
Competitive swimming is a rigorous sport being engaged in by an increasing number of 
young athletes. In swimmers, shoulder pain is the most common musculoskeletal complaint and is usually due to supraspinatus or biceps tendinitis. Glenohumeral instability (often multidirectional) can also be a cause of shoulder pain in swimmers and 
may be more common than has been reported. Surgical treatment is seldom indicated. Physical therapy modalities and training modifications are the mainstay of treatment. Medial knee pain in breaststroke swimmers and extensor tendon inflammation over the dorsum of the foot are less common injuries and respond to conservative therapy. These overuse syndromes are best prevented by proper training schedules, strength training, 
flexibility exercises, and avoidance of errors in stroke technique. The rehabilitation 
program for a competitive swimmer should be chosen with an understanding of the goals 
of the swimmer and the cooperation of the coach. 
Swimming, a popular recreational sport, involves 
120 million participants yearly. Of these, more 
than 165,000 are age-group swimmers registered 
with United States Swimming, Inc., and almost 
19,000 swimmers 25 years of age or older are 
registered with United States Masters Swimming. 
In addition, numerous students are in high school 
and collegiate competitive swimming programs, and an increasing number of people swim regu­
larly for fitness. 
As a sport, swimming is unique for several 
reasons. First, it is an inefficient method of body 
propulsion in comparison with running. The 
water in a pool, for example, is a fluid in an open 
system and is thus not easily compressed by 
the movements of the swimmer. This lack of re­
sistance contrasts with the greater resistance or 
"traction" achieved between the runner's shoe and the ground. Therefore, a considerable amount 
of energy can be expended to swim a short distance. 
*Mayo Graduate School of Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota. 
Address reprint requests to Dr. F. H. Sim, Department of 
Orthopedics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905. Second, swimming is an inertial sport that is 
highly dependent on technique. The force neces­
sary to pull the hand through water is not great; 
however, body position, drag, limb surface area 
for propulsion, buoyancy, endurance, and stroke technique are all factors that contribute substan­
tially to swimming ability. Muscle power contrib­
utes much less to ability in swimming than in many other sports. In fact, improvements in raw 
muscle strength do not necessarily correlate with 
an increase in swimming speed.
1 
Third, swimming provides both upper-body and 
lower-body strength training as well as cardiovas­
cular fitness. Paradoxically, despite the intensity 
of the training, participants have less risk of 
major injuries in swimming than in most other 
sports. 
Technically, the sport of swimming has im­
proved greatly during the past 20 years. Innova­tions such as timed-interval training with use of a pace clock, longer yardage workouts, weight train­
ing, flexibility exercises, and dietary changes 
have all accounted for the continued trend of 
establishment of new swimming records each year. During the past 70 years, the world record 
times for men have decreased by 47% for 
Mayo Clin Proc 62:289-304,1987 289 
290 SWIMMING-RELATED INJURIES Mayo Clin Proc, April 1987, Vol 62 
swimmers in comparison with only an 11.2% 
decrease in world record times for runners over the same
 1-mile  distance.2 Equipment changes such 
as goggles, hand paddles, and kick buoys have also improved the training for swimming. 
Most successful competitive swimmers in the 
United States swim for 10 to 11 months each year 
in a career that often begins by age 6 years and 
may last continuously for 10 to 15 years. Many 
swimmers engage in two swim practices daily,
 5 to 
7 days per week, and often average  8,000  to 20,000 
yards per day, depending on the season. Applica­tion of a four-to-one ratio proposed by Counsil-man
3 shows that this distance is equivalent to 
running 32,000 to 80,000 yards per day—or more than 45 miles per day. This increased intensity has placed the competitive swimmer at a greater risk for musculoskeletal injuries. 
SHOULDER PAIN 
Shoulder pain is the most common musculoskele­
tal complaint in competitive swimmers. In most 
studies reported in the literature, the incidence of 
shoulder pain ranged from 40 to
 80%.4~8 Richard­
son and associates8 studied three groups of 
swimmers and reported that the incidence of shoulder problems increased with the caliber of 
the swimmer—the incidence was 57% among the 
championship group, 52% among the "elite" swimmers, and 27% among the "nonelite" group. 
The incidence of shoulder pain was approximately 
equal between the sexes, and the average age at 
onset was
 18 years. Pain was usually located in the 
anterior or lateral aspect of the shoulder. Almost all the swimmers studied (92%) swam freestyle, 
backstroke, or butterfly. With these three strokes, the arc of shoulder circumduction is wide. In 
contrast, those who swim the breaststroke, which 
involves much less shoulder abduction, are rarely 
afflicted with shoulder pain. 
The most common cause of shoulder pain in 
swimmers is subacromial impingement and ten­dinitis of the supraspinatus tendon, long head 
of the biceps tendon, or both.
6 Recently, however, 
glenohumeral instability (usually multidirec­tional) has also been associated with shoulder 
pain in swimmers and may coexist with 
tendinitis.
6,9 
The term "swimmer's shoulder" has commonly 
been used to describe pain about the shoulder in swimmers regardless of cause. Classically, how­ever, "swimmer's shoulder" refers to the painful 
arc syndrome caused by impingement of the 
supraspinatus and biceps tendons against the overlying coracoacromial ligament or anterior 
border of the acromion. This "impingement 
syndrome," described by Neer,
10 is also a 
common cause of shoulder pain in many other 
overhead-use sports. 
ANATOMY OF THE SHOULDER 
The shoulder joint, per se, consists of the articula­
tion between the shallow, concave glenoid cavity 
of the scapula and the convex surface of the 
humeral head, only a small part of which is in 
contact with the glenoid cavity at any instant. 
Most of the internal and external rotation of the upper extremity occurs at this joint. 
The shoulder girdle also includes articulations 
with the thorax and the distal aspect of the 
clavicle. Together with the glenohumeral joint, 
these articulations allow a combined shoulder 
range of motion of 180° of abduction. This coupled motion between the scapulothoracic articulation 
and the glenohumeral joint occurs in a two-to-one 
ratio;  for every 3° of abduction, the glenohumeral 
joint is abducted 2° and the scapulothoracic artic­
ulation is abducted 1°.11 The wide range of motion 
of the shoulder (primarily abduction) necessary 
for swimming freestyle, backstroke, and butterfly is therefore dependent on the normal coupled 
motion of the shoulder girdle. What the shoulder 
joint achieves in range of motion, however, it 
sacrifices in stability.
12 These characteristics may 
predispose the shoulder to injury, as it is the most 
commonly injured joint of the upper extremity in overhead-use sports such as swimming. 
The minimally constrained bony architecture of 
the shoulder joint is stabilized by the surrounding ligaments and muscles (Fig.
 1). The glenohumeral 
fibrous articular capsule and associated liga­ments consist of the coracohumeral ligament, which has primarily a suspensory function, and the three glenohumeral ligaments (superior, mid­
dle, and inferior). 
The coracoid process, the coracoacromial liga­
ment, and the acromion constitute the coraco­
acromial arch, beneath which the supraspinatus 
and biceps tendons lie. The subacromial bursa, 
which also is located beneath this arch, allows the 
Mayo Clin Proc, April 1987, Vol 62 SWIMMING-RELATED INJURIES 291 
Coracoacromial lig. 
Infraspinatus m. 
{long head 
short heac 
Subscapularis m.' 
Fig. 1. Diagram of shoulder anatomy, showing anterior shoul­
der girdle musculature and coracoacromial arch formed by 
coracoid process, coracoacromial ligament, and acromion. 
rotator cuff tendons to glide smoothly through the 
range of motion. This relationship is important in 
the pathogenesis of swimmer's shoulder, as it is in 
other overhead-use sports that may cause an 
impingement syndrome of the shoulder. 
STROKE MECHANICS 
Swimming is an activity that relies on maximal propulsive force applied over the extremes in 
motion of the upper extremity.
13 Depending on the 
particular stroke, up to 90% of the propulsion is generated from the arm pull. The mechanics of the freestyle stroke illustrate the wide range of motion necessary in the shoulder of swimmers (Fig. 2). The stroke is divided into pull-through and recov­
ery phases (Table l).
8 
The combined shoulder girdle motions involved 
in the butterfly stroke and the backstroke are 
similar to those in freestyle swimming. For all 
three strokes, maximal abduction and adduction, internal and external rotation, and flexion and 
extension are necessary. 
If one assumes that a swimmer averages 10,000 
yards of swimming per day and completes 10 freestyle cycles with each arm every 25 yards, then the average swimmer makes approximately 4,000 
cycles with each arm through this arc of motion 
daily. 
IMPINGEMENT SYNDROME 
The space beneath the coracoacromial arch for 
movement of the supraspinatus and biceps ten­
dons is limited. A painful arc syndrome caused by subacromial impingement of these structures may occur through one of two mechanisms.
14 
First, if the volume of the structures passing 
beneath the arch is increased, less space will be 
available and the possibility of impingement is 
greater. Rathbun and Macnab,15 with use of a 
microinjection technique, studied the vascularity of the rotator cuff and biceps tendons. They found 
that when the shoulder is abducted, such as in the late recovery and hand entry phases of the free­
style stroke, all the vessels of the tendons are 
almost completely filled. When the arm is at the 
side,  however, in the adducted position (such as in 
the late pull-through phase of freestyle, butterfly, 
or backstroke), a constant area of avascularity in 
both the supraspinatus and biceps tendons ex­tends from their respective points of insertion to 1 
cm proximally (Fig. 3). This zone of avascularity 
has been found in cadavers of all ages.
15 There­
fore,  the supraspinatus and biceps tendons are 
subjected to constant pressure from the head of the 
humerus, which tends to "wring out" their blood 
supply when the arm is held in adduction and 
neutral rotation.15 Degenerative changes are fre­
quent in these tendons because of the diminished blood supply at the watershed area. Repeated 
microtrauma in this area results in an inflamma­tory response in conjunction with edema and an 
increase in the volume of the tendinous structures. 
Second, Neer
10 has demonstrated roughness, 
erosion, and formation of osteophytes on the 
anterior and inferior aspects of the acromion in 
response to repetitive impingement by the hu­meral head. Often, such a response occurs at the point of insertion of the coracoacromial ligament. 
Consequently, the available space for movement of the supraspinatus and biceps tendons may be decreased. The functional arc of elevation of the 
shoulder is forward, not lateral; therefore, im­
pingement occurs against the anterior acromion 
and the coracoacromial ligament during repeti­
tive overhead motions that involve extreme 
abduction and forward elevation, such as in 
swimming (Fig. 4). Derangements of the aero-

292 SWIMMING-RELATED INJURIES Mayo Clint Proc, April 1987, Vol 62 
Table 1.—Mechanics of Freestyle Swimming Stroke 
Phase Description 
Pull-through (right arm) 
Hand entry 
Mid pull-through 
End of pull-through 
Recovery (left arm) 
Elbow lift 
Mid recovery 
Hand entry Shoulder is in external rotation 
and abduction. Body roll begins 
Shoulder is at 90° of abduction and 
neutral rotation. Body roll is at 
maximum of 40°-60° from horizontal 
Shoulder is in internal rotation 
and full adduction. Body roll has 
returned to horizontal 
Shoulder begins abduction and 
external rotation. Body roll begins 
in opposite direction of pull-
through phase 
Shoulder is at 90° of abduction and 
external rotation beyond neutral. 
Body roll is at maximum of 40°-60° 
from horizontal. Head is turned to 
side for breathing 
Shoulder is in external rotation 
and maximal abduction. Hand is 
in neutral position or slightly 
pronated 
Modified from Richardson and associates.8 By permission of 
the American Journal of Sports Medicine. 
mioclavicular joint may also predispose to sub-
acromial impingement problems. Neer and 
Welsh16 have classified the progressive pathologic 
changes associated with impingement into three 
stages: (1) Stage I consists of edema and hemor­
rhage of the supraspinatus and biceps tendons 
from overuse, such as in swimming. Characteristi­cally, this pathologic stage is seen in young 
athletes (before age 25 years). (2) Stage II consists of fibrosis and tendinitis (usually in those older 
than 25 years of
 age).  (3) Stage III is characterized 
by degeneration and rupture of tendons and changes in the bony structure (usually in those 
older than 40 years of age). Although stage I 
impingement lesions are most commonly seen 
during a swimmer's competitive years, progres­
sion to stage II or III may occur later in life. 
Kennedy and associates
7 stated that these two 
seemingly divergent mechanisms for causing supraspinatus and biceps tendinitis are com­
plementary in the explanation of swimmer's 
shoulder. Rathbun and Macnab
15 postulated that 
tendon degeneration occurs as a result of the 
avascular area in the supraspinatus and biceps 
tendons when the shoulder is adducted. Neer and 
Welsh16 focused on the mechanical impingement 
of the supraspinatus and biceps tendons under the 
coracoacromial arch as the arm is repetitively brought into abduction and forward flexion. 
Kennedy and colleages7 thought that the avascu­
lar areas of these two tendons were particularly 
vulnerable to mechanical impingement; thus, mi-
crotears and focal cell death could occur and, in 
turn, produce an inflammatory response consist­ing of edema, tendinitis, and subacromial bursitis. These inflamed, enlarged tendons are more sus­
ceptible to mechanical impingement, which 
causes further inflammation and establishes a 
Fig. 2. Stroke mechanics for freestyle swimming. For the right 
arm, three phases are identified: hand entry (top), mid pull-
through (middle), and end of pull-through (bottom). For the left 
arm, three stages are likewise depicted: elbow lift (top), mid recovery (middle), and hand entry (bottom). 
Mayo Clin Proc, April 1987, Vol 62 SWIMMING-RELATED INJURIES 293 
Long head biceps tendon 
Fig. 3. Adduction of arm, as in late pull-through phase of freestyle swimming, is mechanism that 
causes "wringing out" of supraspinatus and biceps tendons. 
vicious cycle that becomes clinically apparent as 
an impingement syndrome. 
Diagnosis.—Determining the diagnosis of im­
pingement tendinitis is usually not difficult. The 
differential diagnosis should include primary 
acromioclavicular pathologic changes, shoulder 
instability, frozen shoulder, traumatic subacro-
mial bursitis, and calcific tendinitis.17 Also, as in 
any patient with shoulder pain, the physician must consider extrinsic conditions that may cause 
referred shoulder pain. These factors include pe­
ripheral nerve entrapments, cervical disk hernia-
tion or degenerative disease, thoracic outlet ob­
struction, and pulmonary or pleural pathologic conditions. 
Richardson and associates
8 studied 58 competi­
tive swimmers with shoulder pain and reported that most had been competing for at least
 10 years. 
Of the freestyle swimmers, 60% had pain on the side on which they took a breath during swim­ming, 75% described pain during both pull-
through and recovery phases, and
 81%  stated that 
use of hand paddles increased their pain. In  83%  of 
those swimmers, the shoulder pain was worse during the early and middle portions of the sea­
son, perhaps because of longer yardage workouts 
and the common use of hand paddles during that 
time. Supraspinatus tendinitis is characterized by 
point tenderness over the greater tuberosity and 
anterior acromion, a painful arc of shoulder ab­
duction, and a positive "impingement sign." The 
impingement test (Fig. 5) reproduces the pain and 
resultant facial expression when the arm is forc­
ibly flexed forward by the examiner and the 
greater tuberosity is levered against the antero-
inferior surface of the acromion.16 Relief of pain by 
injection of 10 ml of 1% lidocaine into the sub-
acromial bursa helps confirm the diagnosis. 
Bicipital tendinitis is characterized by localized 
tenderness over the biceps tendon, a painful catch­ing sensation during resisted forward flexion of the arm with the hand supinated, and pain over the biceps tendon during resisted supination of the 
forearm. 
Treatment.—Swimmer's shoulder has been di­
vided into four phases based on the severity of 
symptoms (not to be confused with the three stages of pathologic changes from shoulder im­pingement, as described by Neer and Welsh
16): 
(1) pain only after heavy workouts, (2) pain (but 
not disabling) during and after workouts, (3) dis­
abling pain during and after workouts that inter­
feres with the swimmer's performance, and (4) 
shoulder pain that prevents competitive swim­
ming. Treatment is directed at the phase of pain 
294 SWIMMING-RELATED INJURIES Mayo Clin Proc, April 1987, Vol 62 
Long head 
biceps tendon Acromion 
process 
Supraspinatus m. 
Fig. 4. Impingement of supraspinatus and biceps tendons between humeral head and coracoacro-
mial arch can occur with abduction and internal rotation of humerus, as in recovery phase of freestyle stroke. Note how serratus anterior muscle rotates scapula into abduction as humerus is 
abducted to allow a greater range of shoulder motion. Scapular rotation also delays impingement of greater tuberosity under coracoacromial arch until humerus is maximally abducted to near 180°. With fatigue or underdevelopment of serratus, humeral impingement may occur at an earlier point in recovery stroke at a lower angle of shoulder abduction. 
that the swimmer is experiencing. The treatment 
for phase 1 and phase 2 swimmer's shoulder is multifaceted (Table 2). Absolute rest of the 
shoulder is usually not necessary in phases
 1 and 2 
of the disorder. The training program is altered to decrease total yardage and also to vary strokes throughout the workout so that one motion is not frequently repeated. Thus, the inflamed tendons 
are rested. 
Swimmers with painful shoulders can experi­
ence night pain while sleeping. Sleeping on the 
involved shoulder or with the arm elevated over­
head will often increase the pain. The most com­fortable position is usually lying supine with the head and shoulders slightly elevated and with 
pillows positioned on the posterior and lateral 
aspects of the adducted shoulder and arm. 
Physical modalities can usually be beneficial 
early in the treatment. Ice massage for 5 to 7 
minutes until the shoulder becomes numb or the more penetrating use of cold packs for 20 to 30 minutes can reduce inflammation and pain. In all 
phases of swimmer's shoulder, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications may be effective for 
short durations. 
In addition to varying the strokes and decreas­
ing the total yardage of swimming, stroke me­
chanics also should be examined and corrected, if 
applicable. The aim of stroke modification is to 
limit the extremes of abduction and internal rota­
tion, in which the position of the supraspinatus tendon is most likely to impinge against the 
coracoacromial arch. The amount of time the arm 
is in adduction should be limited, to spare the 
"wringing out" of the hypovascular area of the supraspinatus and biceps tendons. This result can 
be accomplished by earlier arm recovery, greater body roll, and less internal rotation of the arm at 
hand entry.
18 
Swim fins are used by some coaches to enable 
swimmers with phase  1 or 2 swimmer's shoulder to 
continue training while they are receiving treat­ment. The swim fins increase the power and speed generated by the kick and thereby reduce strain on the shoulder girdle musculature and enable the swimmer to train at a preinjury pace. When using 
Mayo Clin Proc, April 1987, Vol 62 SWIMMING-RELATED INJURIES 295 
Fig. 5. Shoulder impingement test maneuver forces greater 
tuberosity of humerus against anteroinferior surface of acro-
mion. Reproduction of patient's shoulder pain constitutes a 
positive test result. 
a kickboard, swimmers with a shoulder impinge­
ment syndrome should hold the board with the 
affected arm (or arms) flexed slightly at the elbow 
and shoulder. The standard kickboard position 
with the arms extended straight out in front of the 
swimmer with the forearms pronated and resting 
on the kickboard essentially reproduces the im­pingement test maneuver and may aggravate the 
shoulder symptoms. The use of hand paddles 
should be limited or eliminated because they cause 
increased stress in the pull-through muscles and their use has been associated with an increased frequency of shoulder pain.
8 Also, easy warm-up 
and cool-down swims should be part of every 
workout. 
The upper-arm counterforce brace has been 
found to be an effective aid in treating phase  1 and 
2 swimmer's shoulder (Fig.  6). The principle of the 
upper-arm strap is similar to that of the forearm strap introduced by Froimson19 and popularized 
by Nirschl20 for the treatment of tennis elbow. The 
upper-arm brace is an adjustable neoprene band, 
approximately 8 cm wide and with a thickened 
area, that is placed high on the arm directly over 
the biceps tendon (Fig. 7). Although no formal biomechanical studies have been done on the function of the upper-arm brace, it is thought to have a tenodesis effect on the biceps tendon 
making it a more effective humeral head depres­sor, especially during contraction of the biceps. Depression of the humeral head creates more space beneath the coracoacromial arch and 
thereby diminishes subacromial impingement of 
the supraspinatus and biceps tendons. 
Blatz
21 conducted a limited study of 27 age-
group swimmers who were 12 to 19 years old and 
had phase 1 or 2 swimmer's shoulder. All had reproducible impingement pain. Of the 27 partici­
pants,  14 claimed complete relief within 24 to 48 
hours while using an upper-arm strap, 10 re­
ported a 75% decrease in their symptoms of 
pain, and 3 obtained no  relief.  Thus, 24 of 27 
athletes, or approximately 90%, had excellent or 
good short-term results with use of the strap in 
this survey. 
Manual therapy such as sedative or friction 
massage may be helpful in the subacute stage of 
swimmer's shoulder. Electrical therapy is also a useful modality for treating painful shoulders. 
The use of interferential currents, high-intensity 
galvanic stimulation, or Microdyne stimulation 
can be of benefit for relieving pain and increasing 
blood circulation. Because of its expense and the 
difficulty in placement of the electrodes, transcu-
taneous nerve stimulation is generally used only 
after other modalities have proved unsuccessful. 
The proper placement of the electrodes and the 
correct frequency rate (high or low) are crucial for 
effective results. 
Heat modalities such as hot packs or infrared 
heat are occasionally useful because of their seda­tive and analgesic properties. Deeper heat modali­ties such as shortwave diathermy and ultrasound can be used in the intermediate and late phases of 
swimmer's shoulder. 
A strengthening program is usually begun with 
exercises that are below the level of the shoulder, 
to avoid aggravation of any subacromial impinge­
ment tendinitis. Strengthening exercises can be­gin with isometrics, proceed to variable-resistance exercises (with use of surgical tubing), and then 
296 SWIMMING-RELATED INJURIES Mayo Clin Proc, April 1987, Vol 62 
Table 2.—Rehabilitation for Phase 1 and Phase 2 Swimmer's Shoulder Caused 
by Tendinitis and Subacromial Impingement1" 
Treatment Early 
rehabilitation 
(acute phase) Intermediate 
rehabilitation 
(subsidence of 
acute phase) Late 
rehabilitation 
(able to do 
isometrics 
free of pain) Return to 
swimmingt 
Rest Ice NSAIDi 
Swimming training 
modifications 
Manual therapy 
Electrical therapy 
Heat 
Range-of-motion exercises 
Isometric exercises Elastic-tubing exercises Stretching exercises 
Isotonic and isokinetic 
exercises 
Maintenance of flexibility 
and strength program X 
X X 
X 
X X X 
X 
X 
X 
X X 
X X 
X 
X 
X X X 
X X 
X X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
*See text for description of phases. The program for shoulder pain due to glenohumeral 
instability is similar except that manual therapy and stretching exercises are withheld and 
exercises to strengthen the rotator cuff muscles are emphasized. 
tStrength 90% of unaffected shoulder and range of motion
 95%  of normal. 
JNonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. 
advance to isotonics and isokinetics as the re­
habilitation program progresses.22 Once the 
swimmer has no pain and has adequate range of 
motion and strength, a gradual return to swim­ming may begin. 
Therapeutic Exercises.—Therapeutic exer­
cises to correct any muscle strength imbalance or 
loss of range of motion should be prescribed for 
swimmers with disorders of the shoulder. Greipp
23 
reported on the correlation between lack of shoul­
der flexibility and pain. Shoulder-stretching exer­
cises are used to maintain or increase the range of motion of the shoulder. Such exercises should 
involve stretching of all the major muscles that 
aid in forward swimming propulsion, such as the shoulder internal rotators (pectoralis major, latis-simus dorsi, and subscapularis) (Fig. 8).
24 Lack of 
shoulder external rotation because of tight inter­
nal rotators predisposes the swimmer to sub­
acromial impingement of the humerus. Stretching 
exercises should be done in a gentle, prolonged (up to 3 to 5 minutes), pain-free manner. Ballistic 
(bounce-type) stretching that stimulates the stretch reflex is not recommended. Contract-relax or neuromuscular facilitation is an alternate stretching technique; for proper performance of 
these exercises, a partner is often necessary. 
Muscles that stabilize and elevate the scapula or 
externally rotate the shoulder are relatively weak 
in competitive swimmers in comparison with the 
Fig. 6. Upper-arm counterforce brace, used as aid in treating 
early phases of "swimmer's shoulder." (Also see Figure 7.) 

Mayo Clin Proc, April 1987, Vol 62 SWIMMING-RELATED INJURIES 297 
strong shoulder internal rotators that are exer­
cised repeatedly in swimming or hand-pulley 
drills. This relative muscle strength imbalance 
makes it more difficult for the swimmer to achieve 
full elevation of the scapula or to rotate the 
humerus externally in order to prevent impinge­
ment of the greater tuberosity beneath the acro-
mion during overhead motion of the shoulder. This 
impingement occurs during recovery and early 
pull-through phases of the freestyle, backstroke, 
and butterfly stroke. In addition, the rotator cuff 
muscles and biceps depress the humerus in the 
glenoid fossa during elevation of the shoulder. 
Weakness of the rotator cuff muscles allows the 
humeral head to glide higher in the glenoid fossa 
and diminishes the available space for movement 
of the biceps and rotator cuff tendons. This situa­
tion predisposes the swimmer to development of 
tendinitis or a subacromial impingement syn­
drome. Exercises to strengthen the external rota­
tors with the use of surgical tubing or pulley 
weights can be performed (Fig. 9). 
Most muscle-strengthening programs are aimed 
at the primary pull-through muscles, which in­
clude the latissimus dorsi, subscapularis, and 
Fig. 7. Upper-arm brace is placed over biceps tendon high on 
affected arm. The strap makes biceps muscle a more effective 
humeral head depressor and thereby diminishes subacromial 
impingement. Fig. 8. Stretching exercise for shoulder internal rotators. Hand­
held weight with shoulder at 135° of abduction allows gentle 
stretching. 
pectoralis major. Recently, Nuber and col­
leagues13 reported on an electromyographic study 
of seven collegiate swimmers. They showed the 
importance of strengthening the recovery-phase 
muscles, especially the scapular rotators such as 
the serratus anterior. The serratus anterior moves 
the scapula upward and allows it to rotate clear of 
the abducting humerus. If this muscle fatigues 
during the course of repetitive arm motion, scapu­
lar motion may not coincide with humeral mo­
tion, and impingement may be precipitated. Thus, 
a vigorous program to strengthen the serratus 
anterior and other scapular rotators as well as 
the rotator cuff muscles may be an important 
measure to alleviate or prevent subacromial 
impingement.13 
Overall, the basic plan for shoulder muscle 
rehabilitation is to stretch the already strong 
anterior pull-through muscles and to strengthen 
the weaker external rotators and scapular rotators 
used in the recovery phase of the arm stroke. 
Other Therapeutic Measures.—If swimmer's 
shoulder evolves to phase 3 or 4 in which pain 
during and after workouts affects performance, 
then total rest of the affected shoulder may be 
indicated, and land exercises (kicking, jogging, 
and bicycle riding) can be used to maintain fit­
ness.7 When symptoms diminish to phase 1 or 2, 
rehabilitation can begin according to the afore­
mentioned plan (Table 2). 
Local subacromial or bicipital tendon sheath 
injections of corticosteroids have been advocated 
by some,8,14'25,26 discouraged by others,4'7,17,18 and 

298 SWIMMING-RELATED INJURIES Mayo Clin Proc, April 1987, Vol 62 
Fig. 9. Strengthening exercise for shoulder external rotators. 
Surgical tubing attached to a stationary object offers resis­
tance for effective strengthening. 
used with caution by all. Such injections may be 
indicated in phase 3 or 4 swimmer's shoulder 
when pain persists despite a trial of nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs, rest, local treatments, 
exercises, and training modifications. They 
should always be used with caution because of the 
transient effect of tendon weakening that has 
been associated with this treatment27 and the 
uncertainty of the long-term effects of repeated 
injections. Penny and Smith18 maintained that 
injections of corticosteroids should be reserved for 
the national or international class swimmer who 
is about to participate in a major competition 
when it is known that a period of rest will follow. 
Surgical excision of the coracoacromial liga­
ment has a controversial role in the treatment of 
phase 3 and 4 swimmer's shoulder.4'7,17,28 This 
surgical technique is associated with minimal 
morbidity, and it can be done as an outpatient procedure with use of a small deltoid-splitting 
approach and a local anesthetic. Kennedy and 
associates7 reported that the indication for surgi­
cal intervention is failure of conservative treat­
ment after at least 1 year and definite clinical 
signs of impingement. Several reports have de­
scribed successful results with this procedure in 
swimmers who have returned to high-level compe­
tition, although the results of surgical treatment 
in a large group of competitive swimmers are still 
unknown.7,18'28 Neer (personal communication) 
stated that, in his experience, surgical excision of 
the coracoacromial ligament had not enabled 
high-level competitive swimmers to return to com­
petition on a long-term basis. 
Anterior acromioplasty or excision of the distal 
aspect of the clavicle (or both procedures) may be 
indicated if impingement on these structures can 
be demonstrated or if division of the coracoacro­
mial ligament fails to yield relief. Most swimmers 
are unable to return to competition after anterior 
acromioplasty.29 
SHOULDER INSTABILITY 
Recently, involuntary inferior and multidirec­
tional instability has been recognized as a cause of 
shoulder pain in swimmers.9'12 In fact, Neer (per­
sonal communication) currently believes that this 
is the most important factor causing shoulder 
pain in swimmers. Shoulder instability may be 
difficult to diagnose because the symptoms of pain 
may be similar to those caused by impingement 
tendinitis, and the two conditions can coexist. A 
prior history of a major shoulder injury may not be 
elicited. The patient may have discomfort while 
carrying loads that pull downward on the inferior 
part of the capsule or with overhead arm move­
ments such as in swimming. Also, a frequent 
complaint is an arm that feels "dead."30 Emo­
tional disorders should be ruled out; Neer and 
Foster9 found no major emotional problems in 
their series of patients with involuntary shoulder 
instability. 
The basic lesion that contributes to shoulder 
instability is an enlarged joint capsule due to 
repetitive forceful stretching from the wide range 
of shoulder circumduction performed during 
swimming (and in other overhead-use sports). 
Examination of the shoulder should include 
stress on the glenohumeral joint in three direc-
Mayo Clin Proc, April 1987, Vol 62 SWIMMING-RELATED INJURIES 299 
tions—anteriorly, posteriorly, and inferiorly—on 
repeated patient visits. Multidirectional instabil­
ity should be suspected if apprehension is evident 
with inferior stress or stress in more than one direction. The result of the impingement injection test is usually negative. Thorough radiographic evaluation of the shoulder is important and 
should include anteroposterior views in internal 
and external rotation, an axillary view, and a 
West Point prone axillary view.
31 Examination 
under anesthesia and stress films may also be 
helpful. Double-contrast arthrography and arthro-tomography may show a Bankart lesion or 
an enlarged joint capsule but are often diffi­cult to interpret. Computerized axial arthrotomog-
raphy improves resolution and may become the 
procedure of choice in evaluation of difficult or occult cases of glenohumeral instability. 
Initially, multidirectional or inferior instability 
of the shoulder should be treated conservatively— 
the stroke mechanics should be analyzed and 
altered, if necessary, and shoulder-strengthening 
exercises (Table 2) should be performed.
9 The 
objective of the exercises is to enhance dynamic 
stability of the shoulder by increasing the strength and tone of the rotator cuff and deltoid muscles without causing mechanical irritation of the capsule or ligaments. For isolated inferior 
shoulder instability, the emphasis should be on 
strengthening the shoulder abductors. Manual 
therapy and stretching exercises should be with­
held. A balanced strengthening program of all 
rotator cuff muscles is indicated for multidirec­tional instability. Cybex testing can be used to 
determine whether shoulder muscle imbalance is present. Strengthening can involve isometric, iso-
tonic,  and isokinetic training exercises similar 
to those done for the shoulder impingement 
syndrome. 
Many patients with painful shoulders and de­
monstrable shoulder instability will have im­
provement with conservative treatment. Conser­
vative measures should include an appropriate period of rest followed by strengthening exercises below the level of the shoulder to prevent irritation 
of the joint. When the patient returns to swim­
ming, stroke modification is important to prevent 
recurrence. Some strokes, particularly the back­
stroke and butterfly stroke, may need to be avoided. 
Surgical treatment may be indicated for the 
motivated swimmer with hyperlaxity of the liga­ments and inferior capsule in whom a
 1-year  trial 
of conservative therapy has failed. Neer and 
Foster9 described an inferior capsular shift proce­
dure that tightens the glenohumeral capsule. The 
shoulder joint is approached anteriorly or poste­
riorly, depending on the direction of the instabil­
ity, and a T-shaped incision is made in the capsule. The two sides are then sutured as flaps over each 
other to obliterate the capsular redundancy. The 
short-term results of this procedure have been satisfactory, and some collegiate swimmers have 
reportedly resumed competition postoperatively 
(Neer CSII: Personal communication).
9 The prog­
nosis for returning to a high level of competition, however, should be guarded because by the time 
an operation becomes necessary, the changes in 
the soft tissues may be so advanced that repair will allow comfortable daily activities and recrea­tional sports but not the training intensity neces­
sary for successful competition.
12 
APPREHENSION SHOULDER 
Isolated anterior glenohumeral instability is pri­
marily seen in backstroke swimmers and is termed "apprehension shoulder."
7,25 The back­
stroke involves maximal abduction and external 
rotation of the shoulder, particularly during hand 
push-off as the backstroker initiates a flip turn. 
This acquired laxity of the anterior capsule is thought to be caused by repetitive stretching of the 
capsule during the initiation of the backstroke flip 
turn
7 and by certain excessive passive shoulder-
stretching exercises that many swimmers do in 
order to improve their flexibility. Cineradio-graphic studies have shown subluxation of the 
humeral head anteriorly onto the rim of the glen-
oid during extreme abduction and external rota­
tion of the shoulder, as with initiation of the 
backstroke flip turn
7 (Fig. 10). This action causes 
pronounced stress on the anterior shoulder joint 
ligaments. With the arm in this position, the 
subscapularis muscle glides superiorly and is unable to help resist the anteriorly directed force of the humeral head. With repeated stress, the 
anterior shoulder joint capsule may become exces­sively stretched, and anterior shoulder instability 
may ensue. 
Apprehension shoulder can be diagnosed by 
reproducing pain or the sensation of impending 
subluxation with the shoulder in abduction and 
external rotation (positive result of the shoulder 
300 SWIMMING-RELATED INJURIES Mayo Clin Proc, April 1987, Vol 62 
Fig. 10. The backstroke flip turn is initiated by forceful 
shoulder internal rotation and forward flexion with arm in extreme abduction and external rotation and hand firmly 
planted against wall of swimming pool. This action causes considerable stress on anterior shoulder joint ligaments. With 
arm in this position, subscapularis muscle glides superiorly and is unable to help resist anteriorly directed force of numeral head. 
apprehension test) (Fig. 11). Conservative treat­
ment involves strengthening of the shoulder inter­nal rotator muscles for anterior stability. These exercises are usually begun with the shoulder 
adducted and with limitation of extreme external 
rotation. Isotonic or isokinetic exercises with an emphasis on eccentric strengthening should be prescribed. In addition, modification of the back­
stroke flip turn and avoidance of incorrect ante­
rior shoulder-stretching exercises are important. 
If swimmers cannot tolerate the subluxation and 
if they are unable or unwilling to change the mechanics of their flip turn, surgical treatment 
may be indicated. Many procedures such as the Magnuson-Stack procedure, the Bankart repair, the Putti-Platt operation, and the Bristow opera­tion have been described for anterior gleno-humeral subluxation. All these procedures have the disadvantage of potentially restricting exter­nal rotation of the humerus. If this motion is 
appreciably limited, the swimmer will probably have to discontinue backstroke competition.
25 The 
inferior capsular shift procedure may provide 
anterior stability without substantial loss of exter­
nal rotation. Often, there is no satisfactory ap­proach to this problem. 
Shoulder arthroscopy may be a useful adjunct to 
the physical examination in diagnosing shoulder Fig. 11. Shoulder apprehension test. Shoulder is placed in 90° 
of abduction and stressed in maximal external rotation while 
the humeral head is pushed anteriorly with the examiner's 
thumb from behind. A positive test result reproduces pain or 
sensation of impending subluxation. 
instability. Ciullo4 advocated arthroscopic resec­
tion of labral interposition and bucket-handle 
tears and debridement of small rotator cuff tears that may be a source of pain, but such procedures 
are not widely performed. 
Prevention of shoulder pain in swimmers is 
perhaps the most important goal. Errors in the training program should be corrected through 
proper communication with the coach. Ample warm-up and cool-down periods, preventive main­tenance stretching, strengthening programs, and 
proper stroke mechanics are all components of a 
training program that will minimize injuries. 
Coaches and swimmers must be aware of the difference between adequate muscle flexibility 
and capsular laxity caused by unusual or repeated 
stretching maneuvers. Switching strokes fre­quently and breathing on alternate sides in free­style swimming throughout a workout and early 
and midseason strength training may also be 
helpful preventive measures. 
BREASTSTROKER'S KNEE Knee pain in swimmers occurs primarily in those who do the breaststroke and thus has been termed 
"breaststroker's knee." Kennedy and colleagues
7 
surveyed 2,496 competitive swimmers throughout Canada and found 70 who were affected by knee 
Mayo Clin Proc, April 1987, Vol 62 SWIMMING-RELATED INJURIES 301 
pain, all of whom were breaststrokers. Breast-
stroker's knee is characterized by pain and tender­ness in the medial aspect of the knee joint and has been thought to be due to incorrect mechanics of the breaststroke whip kick.
32 Knee effusions and 
patellofemoral pain and crepitus have also been 
reported.32 
In contrast to the freestyle, backstroke, and 
butterfly stroke, much of the speed achieved with the breaststroke is contributed by the whip kick. Training regimens often emphasize the develop­ment of an efficient and powerful kick. The whip 
kick was developed as a variation of the frog kick 
to achieve increased speed, propulsive force, and economy of movement.
3,33 Counsilman3 precisely 
described the proper mechanics of the whip kick. 
Breaststroke swimmers with knee pain tend to 
have a kick {hat more closely resembles the frog kick than the whip kick (Fig. 12). Stulberg and 
associates
32 reported that the primary mechanical 
fault in the swimmer with breaststroker's knee is 
usually excessive abduction of the thighs as the 
hips and knees are flexed during the recovery 
phase. This position places excessive valgus and external rotation stress on the medial supporting 
structures of the knees as the thighs are adducted 
and the legs are rapidly extended during the 
propulsion phase of the kick. 
Kennedy and associates
7 are of the opinion that 
a tibial collateral ligament strain is the primary disorder in swimmers with breaststroker's knee. Stulberg and colleagues,
32 however, studied 23 
competitive breaststroke swimmers with knee pain and found that most had pain along the medial facet of the patella and the medial femoral 
intercondylar
 ridge.  Five swimmers described this 
pain in addition to tibial collateral pain, and only 5 of 23 swimmers had pain isolated to the tibial 
collateral ligament only. Stulberg and co-workers 
also reported that breaststrokers who had been 
using the whip kick for more than 8 years had clinical evidence of patellofemoral chondro­malacia, as seen in two patients who underwent 
arthroscopy. Interestingly, none of the swimmers 
had radiographic evidence of osteoarthritis, ab­
normal patellofemoral-condylar groove relation­
ships,  or osteochondritis dissecans. Both tibial 
collateral ligament strain and chondromalacia of the medial patellofemoral joint may be etiologic factors in breaststroker's knee, although the for­
mer is probably the most widely accepted cause. 
Intuitively, the whip kick, which causes an exces-Fig. 12. Correct and incorrect mechanics of breaststroke whip 
kick. Knees should be abducted no more than width of pelvis during recovery phase and middle of kicking phase. Knees should not achieve full extension until legs are together at end of kicking phase. 
sive valgus stress on the knee joint, would seem­
ingly produce more stress on the lateral patello­
femoral joint; however, Stulberg and associates32 
found only one patient with tenderness of the 
lateral facet of the patella. Also, chondromalacia 
of the medial patellar facet is a common finding in young patients regardless of their activity level. 
Clearly, more research in this area is needed. 
Knee symptoms usually begin within 3 years 
after the first participation in competitive swim­
ming.
32 Initially, the swimmers are symptomatic 
only while kicking; later, however, they may have 
302 SWIMMING-RELATED INJURIES Mayo Clin Proc, April 1987, Vol 62 
knee pain during all activities including climbing 
stairs and arising from low chairs. 
The primary treatment of breaststroker's knee 
is correction of abnormal kick mechanics, which 
will decrease the strain on the medial structures of 
the knee. In the experience of most investigators, this correction alone has been sufficient to elimi­
nate the swimmer's knee pain.
7,32 Most young 
swimmers incorrectly abduct the thighs during 
the recovery phase of the kick and rapidly extend 
the knees with the legs apart during the propul­sion phase of the kick. Particular attention should be placed on keeping the knees closer together during the recovery phase and the mid-kicking phase and preventing the knees from being fully 
extended until the legs are together at the end of 
the kicking phase. In addition, reducing the ante­rior compression forces on the knee by means of 
hamstring stretching and quadriceps isometric 
strengthening exercises with emphasis on the vastus medialis may be helpful. 
The use of proper warm-up exercises, local appli­
cations of
 ice, and ultrasound can be helpful.7 The 
symptomatic breaststroke swimmer should train 
infrequently with the whip kick and should use 
other kicks during workouts. The local use of corticosteroids should be avoided. 
TENDINITIS ABOUT THE FOOT 
AND ANKLE 
With the exception of those who do the breast-
stroke, most swimmers strive to develop maximal 
ankle plantar flexion, which places the foot in a 
better position to push the water in a backward 
direction during the propulsive phase of the flutter 
or dolphin kick. Expert swimmers often will de­velop 90° of plantar flexion. Conversely, breast-
strokers need ankle flexibility in the opposite direction (dorsiflexion). This flexibility enables 
the breaststroke swimmer to place his feet in a 
good position to push the water backward at a point earlier in the kick than would otherwise be possible and thus achieve a more effective kick. 
Cureton
33 has shown that expert swimmers with 
better kicks have greater flexibility in the ankles than average swimmers with poorer kicks. Fur­thermore, Robertson
34 found a significant rela­
tionship between ankle flexibility and propulsive force. Clearly, the extremes of ankle dorsiflexion 
and plantar flexion are achieved through stretch­
ing the muscles of the anterior compartment of the leg and the supporting ligaments about the ankle 
(Fig. 13). This repetitive motion may lead to 
inflammation of the extensor tendons.
7 
Although not as frequent a problem as shoulder 
or knee pain, when foot and ankle pain occurs it 
may considerably alter performance. Tendinitis in this area can be diagnosed when pain and 
crepitus are present over the extensor tendons during flexion and extension. Treatment includes 
local applications of ice and ultrasound, non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory medication, and, for 
persistent or severe cases, local corticosteroid injections around the tendon sheaths.
7 Switching 
the flutter kick to a two-beat instead of a six-beat 
kick may also relieve symptoms. 
CONCLUSION 
Competitive swimming is a rigorous sport being 
engaged in by an increasing number of young 
athletes, often for prolonged, continued periods 
that may last for 10 to 12 years. Modern training techniques are producing steady improvements in world record times for competitive swimming but may also be placing the competitive swimmer at greater risk for injury. 
Among competitive swimmers, shoulder pain is 
the most common musculoskeletal complaint. It is usually due to supraspinatus or biceps tendinitis 
caused by chronic repetitive impingement be­neath the coracoacromial arch, and it occurs 
Fig. 13. The extremes of repetitive ankle dorsiflexion and 
plantar flexion may lead to extensor tendinitis in competitive 
swimmers. 
Mayo Clin Proc, April 1987, Vol 62 SWIMMING-RELATED INJURIES 303 
in freestyle, backstroke, and butterfly stroke 
swimmers. The treatment, which is basically con­
servative, includes alteration of stroke mechanics 
and workout schedules, flexibility and strengthen­
ing exercises, and local measures to reduce inflam­
mation and pain. Surgical excision of the coraco-
acromial ligament or anterior acromioplasty may 
be indicated in severe disabling cases when con­
servative treatment has failed. Postoperatively, 
the prognosis for the return of a swimmer to a prior 
level of competition is guarded. 
Glenohumeral instability (often multidirec­
tional) can also be a cause of shoulder pain in 
swimmers and may be more common than has 
been reported. The diagnosis is often elusive, and 
evaluation should be thorough. Conservative ther­
apy includes muscle strengthening of the rotator 
cuff, deltoid, and scapular rotators and altering of 
stroke mechanics. Surgical treatment to tighten 
the joint capsule provides short-term satisfactory 
results for patients in whom conservative treat­
ment has failed. Long-term results of surgical 
intervention are unknown. 
Shoulder pain can be prevented through proper 
training schedules, strength training, flexibility 
exercises, and avoidance of errors in stroke tech­
nique. Attention should be directed not only to 
muscles used in the pull-through phase but also to 
those used in the recovery phase. 
"Breaststroker's knee" is an inflammation of 
the medial retinacular structures of the knee from 
repeated stress placed on it by the breaststroke 
whip kick. Most investigators have found inflam­
mation of the tibial collateral ligament as the 
source ofpain. The treatmentis focused on correct­
ing abnormal kick mechanics and limiting the 
amount of training using the whip kick. 
Inflammation of the extensor tendons over the 
dorsum of the foot occurs less frequently than 
shoulder or knee pain in swimmers. Treat­
ment includes local application of ice, ultrasound, 
anti-inflammatory medication, and, occasionally, 
local injections of corticosteroids. 
The approach to treatment of musculoskeletal 
injuries in the competitive swimmer should be 
chosen only after the goals of the swimmer and the 
training program of the coach are understood. 
Communication and cooperation among the phy­
sician, the coach, and the athlete will ensure a 
treatment program tailored to the needs of the 
swimmer and will result in a more compliant and 
satisfied patient. REFERENCES 
1. Miyashita M, Kanehisa H: Effects of isokinetic, isotonic 
and swim training on swimming performance. Int Ser 
Sport Sei 14:329-334,1983 
2. Mognoni P, LaFortuna C, Russo G, Minetti A: An analy­
sis of world records in three types of locomotion. Eur J 
Appl Physiol 49:287-299,1982 
3. Counsilman JE: The Science of Swimming. Englewood 
Cliffs, New Jersey, Prentice-Hall, 1968, pp 117-123 
4. Ciullo JV: Swimmer's shoulder. Clin Sports Med 5:115-
137, January 1986 
5. Dominguez RH: Shoulder pain in age group swimmers. 
Int Ser Sport Sei 6:105-109,1978 
6. Fowler PJ, Webster MS: Shoulder pain in highly competi­
tive swimmers (abstract). J Bone Joint Surg [Br] 66:304, 
1984 
7. Kennedy JC, Hawkins R, Krissoff WB: Orthopaedic mani­
festations of swimming. Am J Sports Med 6:309-322,1978 
8. Richardson AB, Jobe FW, Collins HR: The shoulder in 
competitive swimming. Am J Sports Med 8:159-163,1980 
9. Neer CS II, Foster CR: Inferior capsular shift for involun­
tary inferior and multidirectional instability of the shoul­
der: a preliminary report. J Bone Joint Surg [Am] 62:897-
908,1980 
10. Neer CS II: Anterior acromioplasty for the chronic im­
pingement syndrome in the shoulder: a preliminary re­
port. J Bone Joint Surg [Am] 54:41-50,1972 
11. Hoppenfeld S: Physical Examination of the Spine and 
Extremities. New York, Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1976, 
p23 
12. Cofield RH, Simonet WT: The shoulder in sports. Mayo 
Clin Proc 59:157-164,1984 
13. Nuber GW, Jobe FW, Perry J, Moynes DR, Antonelli D: 
Fine wire electromyography analysis of muscles of the 
shoulder during swimming. Am J Sports Med 14:7-11, 
1986 
14. Penny JN, Welsh RP: Shoulder impingement syndromes 
in athletes and their surgical management. Am J Sports 
Med 9:11-15,1981 
15. Rathbun JB, Macnab I: The microvascular pattern of the 
rotator cuff. J Bone Joint Surg [Br] 52:540-553,1970 
16. Neer CS II, Welsh RP: The shoulder in sports. Orthop Clin 
North Am 8:583-591, July 1977 
17. Hawkins RJ, Kennedy JC: Impingement syndrome in 
athletes. Am J Sports Med 8:151-158,1980 
18. Penny JN, Smith C: The prevention and treatment of 
swimmer's shoulder. Can J Appl Sports Sei 5:195-202, 
1980 
19. Froimson AI: Treatment of tennis elbow with forearm 
support band. J Bone Joint Surg [Am] 53:183-184, 1971 
20. Nirschl RP: Tennis elbow. Orthop Clin North Am 4:787-
800, July 1973 
21. Blatz D: Upper arm strap. Swimming World, pp 43-44, 
February 1985 
22. Scott SG: Current concepts in the rehabilitation of the 
injured athlete. Mayo Clin Proc 59:83-90,1984 
23. Greipp JF: Swimmer's shoulder: the influence of flexibil­
ity and weight training. Physician Sportsmed 13:92-105, 
August 1985 
24. Jobe FW, Moynes DR: Delineation of diagnostic criteria 
and a rehabilitation program for rotator cuff injuries. Am 
J Sports Med 10:336-339,1982 
25. Fowler P: Swimmer problems. Am J Sports Med 7:141-142, 
1979 
26. Kennedy JC, Hawkins RJ: Swimmer's shoulder. Physi­
cian Sportsmed 2:34-38, April 1974 
27. Kennedy JC, Willis RB: The effects of local steroid 
injections on tendons: a biomechanical and microscopic 
correlative study. Am J Sports Med 4:11-21,1976 
304 SWIMMING-RELATED INJURIES 
28. Dominguez RH: Coracoacromial ligament resection for 
severe swimmer's shoulder. Int Ser Sport Sei 6:110-114, 
1978 
29. Tibone JE, Jobe FW, Kerlan RK, Carter VS, Shields CL, 
Lombardo SJ, Yocum LA: Shoulder impingement syn­
drome in athletes treated by an anterior acromioplasty. Clin Orthop 198:134-140,1985 
30. Rowe CR, Zarins B: Recurrent transient subluxation of 
the shoulder. J Bone Joint Surg [Am] 63:863-872,1981 
31. NorrisTR: Diagnostic techniques for shoulder instability. 
Instruct Course Lect Am Acad Orthop Surg 34:239-257, 
1985 Mayo Clin Proc, April 1987, Vol 62 
32. Stulberg SD, Shulman K, Stuart S, Culp P: Breast-
stroker's knee: pathology, etiology, and treatment. Am J Sports Med 8:164-171,1980 
33. Cureton TK Jr: Mechanics and kinesiology of swimming 
(the crawl flutter kick). Res Q 1:87-121, December 1930 
34. Robertson DF: Cited by Hay JG: The Biomechanics of 
Sports Techniques. Third edition. Englewood Cliffs, New 
Jersey, Prentice-Hall, 1985, p 363 

