training. The remainder of the athletes performing it ‘sometimes ’
with 47% after a game, 29% pre-season and 35% in-season. The least
effective recovery was contrast water recovery (5.47/10).
Active land-based recovery was second most effective recovery
strategy (7.87/10), with 24% ‘always ’completing after a game, 41%
‘sometimes and 24% ‘rarely ’. Cold water immersion was third (7.73/
10) with 18% ‘always ’after game, 47% ‘sometimes ’after a game, and
24% ‘rarely ’after a game.
Athletes rated various statements on how important or
unimportant each recovery strategy was and for all the strategies
the physical reasons were ranked as being ‘important ’or ‘very
important ’for the majority of athletes. The psychological reasons
were also ‘important ’and ‘very important ’for 4-6 of the athletes,
particularly when it came to the active water-based recovery and the
cold-water immersion.
Self-report by athletes was suggestive of the more physiological
reasons being the most important, stating that the strategies helped
speed up recovery, increase blood ﬂow, decrease in ﬂammation,
swelling and soreness.
Discussion:
To date the survey data suggests athletes reporting why they
believe recovery strategies are effective/ineffective are more aware
of the physiological recovery aspects, albeit at a very basic level, and
less so on the more psychological aspects. This suggests potential
targeted education on psychological aspects of recovery and more on
the physiological aspects to enhance both athlete and coach
knowledge.
Impact/Application to the ﬁeld:
There is a paucity of studies on post-exercise recovery strategies
in far north Queensland, so it is important to gain insight into the
recovery strategies that are utlised, as compared to other states FNQ
has a very unique climate, with high humidity and high
temperatures. Therefore we may need to tailor very speci ﬁc recovery
for athletes to perform at optimal capacity.
Declaration:
My co-authors and I acknowledge that we have no con ﬂict of
interest of relevance to the submission of this abstract.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jsams.2023.08.018
O2023SMA-242
What injuries are sustained by junior community-level football
players? surveillance of an Australian junior football league.
I. Frankea, K. Crossleya, A. Moslera, B. Pattersona, P. Cliftonb, M. Kinga
aLa Trobe University, Australia
bYarra Junior Football League, Australia
Introduction: Injury surveillance in community-level football is
challenging due to resource limitations and diverse organisational
and operational structures. These challenges are particularly
apparent in junior leagues, which often rely on parents and
volunteers to provide player injury triage. We aimed to record the
characteristics of injuries that occurred during games in a
metropolitan-based junior football league in the 2022 season.
Methods:
A Victorian metropolitan-based junior league (U8 to U18, males
and females) employed a commercial ﬁrst aid provider to attend
matches during the 2022 community football season. Injured players
on game day reported to the medic for management and triage
advice. Medical events were recorded by the medics centrally and
then reported to the league. All players and parents who presented
to the medics received a follow-up phone call from a masters levelPhysiotherapist with 12 years of clinical experience to ascertain
injury region, mechanism, game circumstances, immediate and
planned healthcare. All injuries were classi ﬁed against the adapted
versions of the 2020 International Olympic Committee Consensus on
Recording and Reporting of Epidemiological Data on Injuries in Sport,
and the Orchard Sports Injury and Illness Classi ﬁcation (OSIICS).
Results:439 reports were received from medics who covered 67% of game
venues, with 354 (80.6%) parents participating in injury surveillance
calls.
Head strike injuries accounted for 54.8% of all reports (194/354).
A total of 101 reports (52% of all head strike injuries) were classi ﬁed
as medically diagnosed concussions (n=70) or suspected
concussions (n=31) (awaiting medical con ﬁrmation), with 38
(37.6%) of these presenting to an emergency department. 49
(48.5%) players were still experiencing symptoms at the time of
the injury surveillance call ( ≥3 days following the injury). Prevalence
rates indicate that 1 in every 39 players (W: 1 in 35 players vs. M: 1
in 41) sustained a head strike injury during the season, with every
second being a concussion or suspected concussion. After head, the
six most common body regions injured were the ankle, knee,
shoulder, neck, hand and wrist. Females demonstrated a higher
prevalence of ankle (W: 1 in 179 players vs. M: 1 in 342), knee (W: 1
in 179 players vs. M: 1 in 390), and wrist injuries (W: 1 in 536
players vs. M: 1 in 1095).
Regarding game circumstance and injury mechanisms, 160
injuries (45.2%) involved tackling, with 336 injuries (94.9%) resulting
from direct or indirect contact and only 18 injuries (5.1%)
characterised as non-contact.
Discussion:
Concussion or suspected concussion was the most prevalent
reported injury, highlighting the strong need for ongoing awareness
and education in concussion in junior community football. Tackling
should be a focus of ongoing research and monitoring to understand
the detailed mechanisms involved.
Impact/Application to the ﬁeld:
Our study highlights the prevalence, region and mechanism of
injuries sustained in junior male and female community football.
Given the high proportion of contact injuries, speci ﬁcally tackling,
junior community football leagues could increase the disseminationof currently available tackling skill development information.
Furthermore, continual concussion education and awareness to all
stakeholders may optimise injury management in this population.
Declaration:
My co-authors and I acknowledge that we have no con ﬂict of
interest of relevance to the submission of this abstract.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jsams.2023.08.020
O2023SMA-239
Mind the Gap: Bridging the Evidence-Practice Gap on Swimming
Injury Risk Factors –Part B
A. McKenzie
a,S .D u h i ga,A .H a m sb,J .H e a d r i c ka,A .D o n a l d s o nc,
J. Coyned,R .D a n na
aGrifﬁth University, Australia
bGrifﬁth University, Australia
cLatrobe University, Australia
dBond University, Australia
Introduction: The evidence-practice gap, re ﬂecting discrepancies
between academic literature and real-world beliefs and practice, can
lead to suboptimal injury prevention and rehabilitation strategies inAbstracts S140
sports medicine. This study aims to unveil the evidence-practice gap
concerning shoulder injury risk factors in competitive swimmers by
juxtaposing scienti ﬁc literature (systematic review) with expert
practitioner opinions (concept mapping).
Methods:
From September 2022 to February 2023, a mixed-methods concept
mapping survey gathered data from 27 expert swimming practitioners,including physiotherapists (n=13), strength and conditioning coaches
(n=6), researchers (n=6), current elite swimmers (n=2), one
physician, and one nutritionist (Note: some participants held multiple
roles). Expertise was determined by N2 years of experience or currently
working in elite swimming. Participants responded to the focus prompt,
"Based on your experience, what speci ﬁc risk factors do you believe
contribute to shoulder injury in swimmers?". A literature search in April
2022 led to the evaluation and synthesis of 24 articles using the
Newcastle Ottawa Scale and best evidence synthesis. Discrepancies
between expert opinions and systematic review ﬁndings were assessed
by cross-matching identi ﬁed risk factors.
Results:
Experts identi ﬁed 61 shoulder injury risk factors, while the
systematic review revealed 80 investigated variables. The systematic
review found 20 risk factors with evidence supporting injury
association, 52 with no association, and eight with con ﬂicting evidence.
Among expert-identi ﬁed factors, 13% (8/61) were supported by
evidence, 18% (11/61) were opposed, 10% (6/61) were con ﬂicting, and
59% (36/61) remained un-investigated in the literature. Four of the 20
evidence-backed risk factors were not identi ﬁed by experts.
Discussion:
Experts recognised 80% of known injury-associated variables,
demonstrating good research uptake by practitioners. Nonetheless, an
evidence-practice gap persists, with 18% of expert-identi ﬁed risk factors
lacking injury association evidenc e. Practitioners perceive maximal
strength and range of motion as risk factors, but systematic review
ﬁndings contradict this. Expert pmissions can be attributed to biased
research methodologies (e.g., pain-pressure thresholds, fatigue-related
changes in resting scapula position), participant bias toward elite
swimmers (swimmer's competitive le vel), and presumptions regarding
causal risk factors (supraspinatus t endon thickness) rather than injury
proxies. Enhanced communication and collaboration between researchers
and practitioners are crucial to effectively translate evidence-basedknowledge into practice, ultimately bene ﬁting athletes' health and
performance.
Impact/Application to the ﬁeld:
To address the evidence-practice gap, practitioners should seek
increased collaboration with researchers for better knowledge translation,
and researchers should prioritise collaboration with practitioners to
advance practice-driven research.
Declaration:
My co-authors and I acknowledge that we have no con ﬂict of interest
of relevance to the submission of this abstract.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jsams.2023.08.021
O2023SMA-217
Acute Performance, Physiological and Perceptual Responses to
Repeated-Sprint Exercise with Continuous or Intermittent Blood
Flow Restriction
J. Mckee
a, O. Girardb, J. Peiffera, B. Scotta
aMurdoch Applied Sports Science Laboratory, Discipline of Exercise
Science, Murdoch University, Australia
bSchool of Human Sciences (Exercise and Sport Science), The University
of Western Australia, AustraliaIntroduction: Team sport athletes commonly perform repeated
short-duration sprints ( ≤10 s) interspersed by brief recovery periods
(≤60 s). Repeated-sprint training augments physiological determinants
of repeated-sprint ability which are further improved with systemic
hypoxia (i.e., reduced fraction of inspired oxygen). Blood ﬂow restriction
(BFR) is an alternative hypoxic strategy utilizing in ﬂatable cuffs on the
legs that limit arterial in ﬂow of blood and mostly occlude venous return.
Cuffs can be applied continuously (i.e., C-BFR), or intermittently during
only work (i.e., I-BFRWORK) or intra-set rest periods (i.e., I-BFRREST).
The purpose of this study was to examine the in ﬂuence of cuff
application method during repeated-sprint exercise (RSE) on acute
performance, physiological and perceptual responses in Australian Rules
football players.
Methods:
Twelve adult male semi-professional Australian football players
completed one familiarization session and four RSE sessions (3 x [5 x
5-second maximal sprints:25-second passive recovery], 3-minute
rest between sets) on a mechanically-braked cycle ergometer with
C-BFR, I-BFRWORK, I-BFRREST, or no restriction (i.e., Non-BFR).
Power output and cardiorespiratory responses were continuously
monitored, and mean values were calculated for each set. Fingertip
capillary blood samples were assessed for blood lactate
concentration after two minutes of rest following each set. Rating
of perceived exertion and lower-limb discomfort were collected at
the end of each set. Linear mixed models were used to compare
differences in means of dependent variables between conditions and
sets, and an alpha level of p b0.05 was used to determine
signiﬁcance.
Results:
Mean power output was greater for Non-BFR (p b0.001, dz =
1.58), I-BFRWORK (p = 0.002, dz = 0.63), and I-BFRREST (p = 0.003,
dz = 0.69) than C-BFR, and for Non-BFR (p = 0.043, dz = 0.55)
compared with I-BFRREST. Blood lactate concentration (p = 0.166)
did not differ between conditions. Ratings of perceived exertion
were greater for I-BFRREST (p = 0.042, dz = 0.51) and C-BFR (p =
0.011, dz = 0.90) than Non-BFR, and during C-BFR (p = 0.023, dz =
0.54) compared with I-BFRWORK. Similarly, perceived limb
discomfort was higher during I-BFRREST (dz = 0.94 and 0.66;
respectively) and C-BFR (dz = 1.19 and 0.84; respectively) than
Non-BFR and I-BFRWORK
Discussion:
Similar blood lactate concentration was observed between
conditions despite lower mean power output during C-BFR and I-
BFRREST than Non-BFR. Therefore, reduced oxygen delivery and
phosphocreatine resynthesis with C-BFR and I-BFRREST likely
increases peripheral fatigue development and is preferential for
athletes who want to obtain a greater metabolic load during RSE for a
given mechanical stress. However, C-BFR and I-BFRREST were
perceived as more dif ﬁcult which was driven by greater perceptions
of limb discomfort due to increased metabolic stress and discomfort
associated with cuff pressure. Therefore, C-BFR and I-BFRREST may
not be tolerated as well by athletes which can limit exercise
compliance.
Impact/Application to the ﬁeld:
Practitioners should be aware that C-BFR or I-BFRREST reduces
mechanical output and may be suitable for athletes in the later stages
of injury rehabilitation or undertaking demanding training blocks,
which require greater emphasis on internal (i.e., physiological
stress) rather than external (i.e., mechanical output) loading.
Declaration:
My co-authors and I acknowledge that we have no con ﬂict of
interest of relevance to the submission of this abstract.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jsams.2023.08.022Abstracts S141
