SPORTS TRAINING OF ELITE SWIMME RS WITH ORTHOPEDIC INJURIES 
R.R. Makhmutiva, L.A. Bordukova, A.A. Strokin , candidates 
E.R. Rumyantseva , professor, Dr.Biol. 
L.R. Makina , associate professor, Dr.Hab. 
Bashkir Institute of Physical Culture, Ufa  Key words:  sports training, elite athletes  with orthopedic injuries, sw imming, bioelectrical activity of 
muscles.  Introduction.  The constant growth of the number of th e involved in Paralympic sports and their 
achievement of the leading positions at the national a nd world levels arouse great public interest in the 
development of adaptive sport. At this stage,  Russia is among the lead ing countries developing 
Paralympic sport. Swimming is one of the most comm on sports for the disable d, and in the number of 
medals it is inferior only to track an d field athletics. The peculiarities of  sports training of  elite athletes 
with orthopedic injuries  are associated with their di sabilities. The analysis of the research findings on this 
subject suggests that some aspects of Paralympic swim mers training are disclosed in the researches of the 
scientists [2, 4], but the acquired data  do not fully justify the essential fe atures of the formative factors of 
the sports skills of swimmers in this category. 
The purpose of the study was to develop and prove effectiveness of the methodology of the 
differentiated sports training based on the leading dominant factors, which determine high achievements 
of elite athletes with orthopedic injuries  to the utmost degree.  
Materials and methods.  The research involved 21 swimmers  with orthopedic injuries, who in 
accordance with the international cl assification fall under S5-8 classes (in our study the athletes were 
divided into 2 groups: the ones with the central nervous system disorder s and the ones with diamelia), the 
Russian national team and reserve team members, havi ng the sports title of H onored Masters of Sport, 
World-class athletes, the re st - Masters of Sport of Russia. The athletes were  aged 17-25. The research 
methods used in this work were as follows: analys is and summary of the specialized literature data, 
questionnaire, survey, psychologica l and pedagogical tests, neuromy ography, mathematical statistics 
methods. Results and discussion.  Using the differentiated approach to orga nization of sports training in our work 
with elite swimmers we considered the peculiaritie s of their muscular performance and higher nervous 
activity, which were conditioned by various pathologies of the subjects. Basing on the analysis, synthesis and summary of the preliminary experimental studies [1, 3], aimed at 
determining the outlines and organization of sports training with due regard to the functional 
characteristics of athletes, the following dominant f actors, which to the utmost degree determined the 
achievement of high results by swimmers with orthopedic injuries, were found: 
– the main physical qualities that contribute to  high results in Paralympic swimming are speed 
characteristics (rate of movement, responsiveness, distance  velocity), coordinatio n abilities (balancing 
ability, motor coordination, differentiation of muscle  force in time and space) and endurance (speed, 
coordination, general endurance); – mental health characteris tics of swimmers with or thopedic injuries. They are mostly determined by a 
high level of situational anxiety and emotional imbala nce, however, improvement of athletic performance 
is pertinent to the display of such personal attri butes as: interest in specific sport, diligence and 
commitment, discipline and ability to ta ke stock of own capacities and actions; 
– functional status of the neuromuscular system. As regards athletes with th e central nervous system 
disorders, it is characterized by low- amplitude oscillations at  voluntary muscle tensi on and an increase of 
the amplitude of muscle biopotential during their relaxa tion, which is directly opposite to the standard; 
different failures of neuromuscular conduction and tr ophic processes in muscles due to muscle blood flow 
disturbances in athletes with di amelia; pathologically enhanced growth of bone  tissue and corresponding 
reduction of the senescent bone tissue degradation ra te; increase of muscle re covery time after physical 
load. Based on the results of the preliminary studies, the methodology of the differentia ted sports training was 
developed with its procedural com ponents being: workload parameters (Table 1), ratio of the amount of 
work in water of diverse power orient ation (Table 2), heart rate of athlet es at work of diverse orientation 
(Table 3); a set of psychological and pedagogical meas ures (designated muscular regulation and special 
warm-up, including breathing exercises); a set of rec overy measures (individual massage programs made 
with due regard to current pathologies). Table 1.  Annual macrocycle optimal workload parameters for elite swimmers with  orthopedic injuries , % 
Workload parameters Annual macrocycle  
Pre-season Regular season Off-season 
Amount of work on 
land 45-50 30-40 60-65 
Amount of work in 
water 55-50 70-60 40-35 
 
Table 2.  Annual macrocycle ratio of the work in water of  diverse power orientat ion for elite swimmers 
with orthopedic injuries, %  
Water exercises of Annual macrocycle 
different power 
orientation Pre-season Regular season Off-season 
General 
preparatory 
phase Special 
preparatory phase 
Aerobic-anaerobic  15-20 35-40 40-45 10-15 
Aerobic 40-45 30-35 25-30 20-25 
Compensatory 
swimming 30-35 25-30 20-25 60-65 
 
Table 3.  Optimal heart rate for elite swimmers with orthop edic injuries at work of diverse orientation  
 Groups of swimmers  Workload aimed at fitness 
improvement, HR Workload aimed at fitness 
maintenance, HR 
With diamelia  144-156 138-144 
With the central nervous system disorders 156-174 144-156 
 
The offered differentiation of sports training for Pa ralympic swimmers promotes better formation of 
adaptive and compensatory mechanisms, enabling to pr event a negative effect of stress factors during 
training and competitive activities. Using the developed set of recovery measures in s ports training (individual ma ssage programs made with 
due regard to the current pathologies) a more acco mplished level of performance of the neuromuscular 
system of elite swimmers with orthopedic injuries  can be formed. This fact is backed up by the following: 
– at the end of the experiment, the maximum amplitude of  the electrical activity of the trapezius muscle of 
the athletes, who had been subsumed under the di amelia category, increased by 30% on average as 
compared to the data received at  the beginning of the experiment; 
– at the end of the experiment, during the volun tary trapezius muscle tension and relaxation  
the indices of the athletes, who had been subsumed  under the category of the central nervous system 
disorders, approximated th e physiological standard. 
Using the differentiated approach in sports traini ng, including the developed set of psychological and 
pedagogical measures (designate d muscular regulation and speci al warm-up, including breathing 
exercises), enables effective development of mental  determination, attention span, development of 
balance of excitation and inhibition of the nervous system of swimmers with orthopedic injuries, as 
indicated by the reduced response time and number of mistakes in the "Attention evaluation" test, 
improvement of speed of orientating and search ing eye movements and mental determination, as 
evidenced by the reduction of passing time and of th e number of mistakes in  the "Schulte-Platonov 
Tables" test. In order to estimate the effectiv eness of the developed methodology of differentiated sports training 
based on the leading dominant fact ors, which determine high achieve ments of elite athletes with 
orthopedic injuries  to the utmost degree, the analysis of the sports achievements was carried out after the 
experiment, basing on the World Championship results (Table 4). The analysis of the competition results 
showed that the athletes of the experimental gro up won 3 gold, 6 silver and 1 bronze medal. They were 
third in the overall medal count . 3 world records were set. 
 
Table 4.  Results of the World Swimming Championship betw een athletes with orth opedic injuries from 
the experimental group (Canada, 2013) 
Swimming stroke Class Place Result Behind the leader 
400 m crawl (freestyle) S7 2 4.39,19 0,05 
100 m backstroke S7 2 1.11,79 2,13 
100 m backstroke S 8 1 1.03,32 WR  
2 1.04,90 1,58 
200 m medley swimming SM8 2 2.23,48 0,72 
100 m butterfly stroke S8 2 1.00,75 0,15 
100 m crawl S 8 1 56,48 WR  
3 57,82 1,34 
50 m crawl S 8 1 25,81WR  
2 26,71 0,90 
 
Comments: S – freestyle swimming, backstroke and butterfly; SM – in dividual medley swimming, SB – 
breaststroke swimming; WR – world record.  
Conclusion.  Using the developed methodol ogy with the procedural com ponents including the rational 
parameters of training effects in the annual macroc ycle, a set of psychological  and pedagogical methods 
and recovery methods resulted in significantly positiv e changes in physical fitness indices, mental and 
functional status. 
 
 References 
1. Bordukova, L.A. The features of metabolism in bony tissue of elite athletes with orthopedic injuries  // 
Actual problems of athlet e’s training and health protection: Collected researches (with international 
participation). Chelyabinsk, 2013. - P. 49-56. (In Russian) 2. Evseiev, S.P. Experimental plan s of programs of scientific and methodological support in Paralympic 
Sport / S.P. Evseev, O.M. Shelkov, D.F. Mosunov, I. V. Kleshnev // Adaptivnaya fizicheskaya kultura. № 
2 (34), 2008. P. 35-37. (In Russian) 3. Rumyantseva, E.R. Problems and prospects of trai ning of elite athletes w ith orthopedic injuries  / E.R. 
Rumyantseva, A.A. Strokin, L.A. Bordukova, R.R. Makhmutova // Teor iya i praktika fizicheskoy kultury. 
- 2013. - № 7. - P. 38-43. (In Russian) 
4. Rumyantseva, E.R. Physical training of athl etes with orthopedic injuries: monograph / E.R. 
Rumyantseva, A.R. Dayanova, G.M. Yulamanova.  - Ufa: BashIPhC, 2010. - 78 P. (In Russian) 
 
Corresponding author: rumelv@yandex.ru
 
 
