Univ ersity of Alabama in Huntsville Univ ersity of Alabama in Huntsville 
LOUIS LOUIS 
1991 Exponent (1969-2012) 
1991 
Ragplonent 1991-05-22 Ragplonent 1991-05-22 
Univ ersity of Alabama in Huntsville 
Follow this and additional works at: https:/ /louis.uah.edu/exponent-1991 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Univ ersity of Alabama in Huntsville, "Ragplonent 1991-05-22" (1991). 1991 . 38. 
https:/ /louis.uah.edu/exponent-1991/38 
This News Ar ticle is br ought t o you for fr ee and open access b y the Exponent (1969-2012) at L OUIS. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in 1991 b y an authoriz ed administr ator of L OUIS. 
RAG P LONE NT "Let us dare not to read, nor think, nor speak nor write. -Big Bird 
UAH Budget: Part 573 dash 42A 
UAH Vice Presidents Renrunsell, Jost. and Warbad May 22,1991, Wednesday 
Proration 
Spells 
SOS by Uwana No 
reporter 
After "Education" Governor Heinz 
approved 95.4% proration this week, the 
special UAH Committee for Budget Snafus 
gathered to think of new steps to deal with 
the further loss of funding. 
The special committee is composed of the 
provost, the associate provost, five vice 
presidents, five assistant vice presidents, 
five university directors, and the five Col­
lege of Liberal Arts faculty members. 
Provost U. Will Roast assured the "in 
hock" committee that Terry Quicksand of 
the Office of Finance and Administration 
was prepared to suggest viable solutions. 
Quicksand began his presentation with a 
review of previous solutions. 
"As you know, we have ruled out the 
rather impractical solutions suggested by 
the SGA and various student groups to 
weed out unnecessary administrators or to 
discontinue paying individuals who no 
longer work for the university. Instead, we 
have found ways to please most members of 
the UAH community in the past without 
resorting to such drastic measures. I am 
confident we will be able to do so again," 
said Quicksand. 
He explained, 'The utilization of only 
key faculty members and the elimination of 
all 100 level courses have allowed us to 
develop a revolutionary streamlined ap­
proach to education. Also, we have pleased 
both environmentalists and helped balance 
the budget by discontinuing the use of cen­
tral heat and air in all academic buildings. 
"Now, we are embarking on yet another 
fiscal challenge, but the solution is one with 
educational benefits and exponential mon­
etary possibilities. As a requirement for 
chemistry labs, students will synthesize 
compounds such as acetylsalicylic acid 
(better known as aspirin). 
"We plan to substitute this compound 
with lysergic acid diethylamide (or LSD). 
The synthesis of this compound can be done 
relatively cheaply, and the projected rev­
enue from the street sale of the product can 
be up to $1.4 million annually," said 
Quicksand. 
He continued, "We are depending on the 
vice president of Student Affairs to orga­
nize a gang of dependable UAH students to 
traffick the product. A tentative name for 
the gang is the SOS (Selling Out Students)." 
Quicksand noted, "The attractiveness of 
this plan is its versatility. If salts go as 
planned, the university can diversify its 
synthetic drug line to include drugs like 
XTC and crystal. The Biology Department 
is looking into growing psychedelic mush­
rooms." 
"We have the goal of becoming the larg­
est academic cartel in the Southeast by 
1995," Quicksand concluded. 
For Information about becoming in­
volved in this enterpreneurial activity call 
Quicksand at 895-6666 or cellular phone 
line number 465-3. by Marilyn Salamander 
our fearless leader 
In a series of meetings with staff, fac­
ulty and students, UAH administrators 
outlined the newest actions that will be 
taken in the on-going struggle to try to 
balance the books. 
"Due to the latest announced pro-ra­
tion of 97.8 percent, we are in extreme 
difficultv." said Juan J Jost, provost. "In­
terim President Jochuin has appointed an ad 
hoc committee to see what we can do. We 
are firmly committed to the idea that we will 
not reduce salaries or personnel at this uni­
versity. But if these people want to volun­
tarily leave we certainly would not discour­
age them from doing so at this time." 
Associate Provost Warbad declared, 
'This is not the time to cut back. During 
down-turns in the economy is the time to 
spend. Although the research side has 
continually had to bail out the academic 
side, we are prepared to do so again. But I 
want to let the faculty know that I expect to 
see them do some research for my money. If 
I have to let all of my Pis go and they don't 
come up with something, this institution is 
going to be in bad shape. Why, we might 
even have to return some of our money for 
funded research. Also, I have a chance to 
pick up a plant that is losing money for 
General Incompetence. They have $ 15 mil­
lion in contracts in Kuwait. Several gener­
als have assured me that if we pay to transport 
it to UAH they will guarantee us $75 worth 
of contracts. This is an opportunity we cannot 
afford to pass up." 
Finance Vice President Gary Slowwater 
said that this institution is in serious trouble. 
He said that Moe Doodle of the System 
Office had told him we would be broke by 1995. According to Doodle, as told by 
Slowwater, the only hope for UAH is to fire 
the remaining two Liberal Arts professors. 
"After all, those people don't bring any 
money into the system," said Slowwater. 
"Besides Doodle said anyone wanting a 
degree in the humanities or Social Sciences 
needs to be at the University of August 
Tomfoolery — You all don't even have a 
football team for God's sake." 
Advancement VP Ron Renrunsell told 
the Ragplonent, "I have been told to raise 
$2 billion or have my budget cut by that 
much!" 
'They won't let me hire a fund devel­
oper, they've removed our telephones, they 
won' t even let me buy postage to mai 1 pleas 
to alumni," Renrunsell continued, "How­
ever, even though things look bleak, my 
incredible staff is up to it. Rock Hold and 
MoleTogetherman have been busy training 
carrier pigeons to get the message about 
UAH out Paul Commoner and Julie Oakes 
have been going around town chalking the 
UAH message on the sidewalks and build­
ings since we've cut out all publications. 
We didn't even have to buy any chalk, we 
liberated it from the unused classrooms in 
Moribund Hall before we tore it down for 
building materials for the Civil Engineers to 
enter another contest." 
Vice President for Student Affairs C. 
Joan Hunter said, "We are trying to see that 
student services are not cut any further. 
While there has been some reduction we are 
holding the line. It is true that we have had 
to put a $100 charge on condoms at the 
information desk and a $200 service charge 
for treatment at the Illness Center. We don't 
feel that the charges for these services are 
out of line, since the oniy students left on 
campus after Kroger cut the scholarships The University of Agonized Humanities 
and Doodle got rid of the humanities people 
are in Engineering, Medicine or Adminis­
trative Science. Not only do these people 
have mega-buck futures, but they generally 
have rich parents, so a small charge for 
service doesn't hurt them too much. In 
addition, Weave Loose has come up with 
some dynamite ideas. The game room is 
being turned into a pleasure palace. We will 
be showing XXX movies for a small fee and 
selling bootleg copies. AlsoUC Room 131 
is being turned into a swimming pool. The 
diving board has been held up due to the fact 
that Purchasing is understaffed with only 
5,782 employees. TheUniversity Center no 
longer has to cater to students—since there 
are none left on this end of campus—so we 
are turning it into a Faculty recreation cen­
ter. While it is true that we have had to cut 
the budgets of ACE, SGA and the exponent 
to zero, we have not had to cut athletics at 
all. Also, aging hippie Weave Loose is 
bringing some dynamite acts to the Univer­
sity Center. We expect to only lose $435,000. 
Besides, I am personally doing my part in 
this crunch, I don't even drive a Crown 
Victoria or have a cellular phone." 
The Ragplonent was unable to talk to 
any Deans or Directors (except for Physical 
Plant Director Rave Crown) for this issue, 
since they were all out talkine to head-
hunters about jobs at well-endowed private 
colleges. 
Crown told the Ragplonent, "It is dif­
ficult to do the work necessary to maintain 
our lovely campus with such a reduced 
staff. I have been able to maintain the cam­
pus police force at 5984 in order to watch 
the four students left in housing and write 
decal violations. In addition, June Masters-
Hopping has rented three more units in the 
Padroolo Hilton. Not to students, of course, 
but to Administrative Science instructors so 
they can have private conferences with their 
students. So not having any sound-proofing 
in their offices has really paid off. In addi­
tion, we were able to keep on all 750 person­
nel needed to maintain Jochuin Lake. Our 
custodial staff has agreed to take a 50 per­
cent pay cut and work an additional 40 
hours a week. In this way, we reduce their 
total budget for salaries to $5.00 a day — 
this does not include Tarney's salary of 
$350,000 . Probably the one area that was 
easiest to cut was mai ntenance. Re ve Lately 
and Linebum Murray have agreed to stop 
taking coffee breaks at the UC with Chief 
Kneewoman for an annual savings of 
$85,000." 
Typesetter's note: Can 'tshe write 
a story under 10,000 words? 
INSIDE THIS R-SECTION 
Nothing 
Lampoon & Satite y.— —^ 
Ragplonent Page R-2 LAMPOON & SATIRE May 22,1991, Wednesday 
Hockey 
by I. Gotta Tipp 
investigative slanderer 
It has recently been discovered by the 
ragplonent that the parking problem on this 
campus was a deliberately planned problem 
to keep the students ticked off about 
something other than the budget problems. 
This was done so students would not 
notice administrators who receive six digit 
salaries and talk on th eircellular telephones 
while driving in their Crown Victorias on 
their way to wine and dine prospective 
employers from out of state colleges at the 
Heritage Club, or notice that all of their 
faculty had been replaced by artificial in­
telligence robots that require little or no 
maintenance and absolutely no fringe ben­
efits, other than the occasional hot oil treat­
ment. 
The Campus Complaining Committee, 
it has been discovered, in cahoots with the 
Mental Plant, concocted this scheme during 
many dark hours underneath the not-quite-
complete Padulo Hilton. 
Last Thursday, this reporter disguised 
himself as a $21,000 La-Z-Boy recliner and 
awaited the coming of this devious group to 
the secret underground Star Chamber that 
was set up to plan the downfall of our once 
great university. 
The guest speaker of the early hours 
was Slave Brown, director of the Mental 
Plant. Brown presented many of the com­
plaints of students to the Committee which, 
quite naturally, was glad to hear them. 
("The Campus Complaining Commit­
tee was originally begun to take care of 
student complaints," said Dr. V. Meanne 
Fissure, vice president for Student Repairs. 
Hey Look!!!!!! It's Another Solution to the Parking Problem!!!!!!!! 
by Dan in correspondence with George, 
US White House 
for the Ragplonent 
The time has come to settle some issues 
before his majesty's term comes to an end. 
We have become aware that there is a dis­
turbance of parking at the University of 
Agonized Humanities and the president has 
issued a resolution 
The United States Relief Fund will be 
funding a 14 tier parking garage across the 
street from Roberts Hall. This garage will 
be based upon student and faculty standing 
as to which floor they will park on. Each 
floor will also be split into sections according 
to the color of the car of the registered 
person. ^ 
The divisions will be as follows: 
Floor 1: Undergraduate students who 
have been so for more than 16 years. 
Floor 2: Graduate Students 
Floor 3. Seniors 
Floor 4. Freshmen 
Floor 5. Juniors 
r The opinions expressed in the Ragplonent are solely the responsibility of the anonymous^ 
loonies who thought them up. In no way shape or form should they be taken as the beliefs 
of anyone else in the world. Especially, they are not the views of the UAH administration, 
staff, faculty^ students, or of the University Publications Board. We tried to warn these guys 
about slander and libel, but they would hot listen to us. Please do not blame the staff of the 
exponent because these strange green guys with three eyes took over the equipment If you 
do not find theses pages humourous, you are not alone - you can't say we didn't warn you. Players Pucked by Frank 
"However, they seem to have taken their 
job a bit too far by analyzing these com­
plaints and attempting to make things 
worse." When asked to respond to this. Vice 
President for Finangling-the-Administra-
tion, Ver-y Quicksand, commented, "I think 
it is very important for the students to have 
something they can be pissed-off at. It 
promotes activity among them and makes 
them feel like they're doing something 
worthwhile, when actually they're not. It 
also keeps their minds off the other issues 
like the budget, faculty, and course offerings 
which should not be their concern, as they 
are not the important ones here.") 
The Committee, upon hearing the com­
plaints that dealt mostly with parking, im­
mediately set about to make things worse. 
They quickly designed and approved a 
proposal, which, they decided, would be 
presented to the SGA after the plan's 
implementation. 
The plan is as follows (sort of, as close 
to the original as possible—at this point this 
reporter was having some technical difficulty 
with his reel-to-reel recorder, the only piece 
of high-tech equipment owned by the 
ragplonent). 
Different students, faculty, and staff 
will receive various color parking stickers 
that will designate them to park in specific 
lots on campus. 
Red stickers will be given to Liberal 
Arts students, who will park in the red-
zoned lot at the Engineering Building. 
Green stickers will be designated for 
non-functional staff, who get to park in the 
green-zoned lot currently designated as 
visitor and 20-minute spaces in front of the 
University Offcenter. The white zones in front of buildings 
will be designated for loading aqd unload­
ing of Marrinott employees only. 
Blue stickers will be given to the ath­
letes who will not be allowed to drive anyway 
since they all failed their basic driving 
courses—they will instead be heliported 
from the top of the Padulo Hilton directly to 
Spragins Hall as to avoid any possible in­
juries, and the blue stickers will be available 
only so they can put them on their jock 
straps (go Charger Blue!). 
(Incoming President Dr. "Ball Park" 
Frank Frenzy has already announced that he 
will be forcing the Hockey players to play 
football when he arrives. This has made 
some of the players very happy, while others 
are not quite as thrilled. This division among 
team members has recently become very 
heated. The SGAjust chartered a club called 
Pigskins and Friends, and when asked about 
the team members opposed to the group, the 
president of the new club was quoted as 
saying, 'They are just used to playing with 
something small." An opposing team mem­
ber, who wishes to remain anonymous, told 
the ragplonent, "We find pigskin appalling. 
Myself, I prefer sheep." Comments like this 
last one have made some students put out 
blacklists with the motto "Don't date the 
Hockey Team.") Yellow stickers will go to administra­
tion that does not drive the Crown Victorias 
and must park at least one mile away to 
allow the administrators with Crown 
Victorias to park wherever they damn well 
please (those administrators with the cars 
do not need stickers, as the Campus Boy 
Scout Patrol will not ticket them anyway, 
according to Chief Jaws R. "Bud" Layman, 
the chief eagle scout for the troop). 
Nursing students who attend classes in 
the Nursing Building will have to leave 
theircars downtown at the School of Primary 
Medical Care and walk to campus. 
Engineering students will not be given 
stickers at all, as they will be forced to 
carpool in the electric cars currently not 
being used. 
Administrative Science students will 
also not be allowed to park on campus; 
instead they will have to design and 
implement a plan to fund an underground 
parking garage, locate the funds to build the 
garage through various fundraising ban­
quets, and then realize that the funds would 
be confiscated by the university adminis­
tration in order to prevent the up-coming 
hostile takeover by Alabama A&M. 
Everyone else will have to fight for the 
parking spaces across Sparkman Drive at 
the Commuter Science Building. (Note: 
Anyone losing appendages or organs due to 
being hit while crossing Sparkman on foot 
please notify Art Professor Ben Flasher— 
one day your appendages/organs could be­
come famous.) 
Next week the ragplonent will con­
tinue the investigation into the Campus 
Complaining Committee. (That is, if this 
reporter can figure out how one gets out of 
a $21,000 La-Z-Boy recliner....) 
Floor 6. Sophomores 
Floor 7. Part-time students with no 
family 
Floor 8. Part-time students with family 
but no children 
Floor 9. Part-time students with family 
and children 
Floor 10 Visitors 
Floor 11. Teachers who make more 
than $50,000 
Floor 12. Teachers who make less than 
$50,000 
Floor 14. Presidents, Directors, and 
Department Chairs 
Floor 15. Deans of the Colleges 
Each floor, as previously mentioned, 
will be divided into sections with 500 spaces 
per floor. They are as follows: 
1-50 cars that are red 
51-100 cars that are white 
101-200 cars that are green 
201-250 cars that are blue 
251-300 cars that are gray 
301-350 cars that are silver 
351-400 cars that are orange This is not a 14 deckparking garage, but if you use your imagination you can interpolate. 
401-450 cars that are yellow 
451-500 cars that are purple 
No black cars will be allowed in the 
garage—you may want to trade your limos 
in now. 
If there are extra spaces in one or more 
sections, and there is not enough in another, 
it is permissible to put the overstocked cars 
in the under-stocked area, as long as the 
colors do not clash. Shades of colors will be 
place in their own family. For example, pink would be put in the red section. It is different 
in the case of two or more colors; Maroon 
for example, could be put in either red or 
purple, whichever has more available 
spaces. 
We hope this solves the unfortunate 
problem of parking at UAH and if there is 
need for more spaces...Please don't call on 
us, we have enough campuses to help out 
before we start going though them again!!!! 
(No staff allowed of course.) 
Drum roll Please 
May's new teacher of the month is 
Dr. Richard Cranium!!!! 
Dr. Cranium, affectionally referred to 
by close friends as Dick Head, has been 
with UAH's Political Science department 
for many years now and is currently await­
ing tenure. Cranium received his Ph.D. at 
The Institute of Mind Washing in Mobile, 
Alabama, better known as the "culture 
capital of the world." 
Cranium once served as a personal 
advisor to Gary Hart. During the Hart-Rice 
scandal, Cranium said, "I can't believe that 
the American people would deny Mr. Hart's 
shot at the presidency simply because he 
got a little homy. For God's sake give him 
a break." 
Cranium has also attended ski vacations 
in Aspen with Donald Trump and Maria 
Maples. Asked later if he knew anything of 
the affair, Cranium responded, "Yes I did. I 
was in total disagreement with Donald's 
actions, but he said there was no way he 
would be caught dead wearing a condom. 
Cranium has developed a firm interest 
in Huntsville's artistic community. You can 
often find him admiring the dancers at the 
Governor's Drive Top Less Dance Lounge. 
Cranium said< "I believe these young ladies 
can communicate things with their pasties, 
that no teacher in a class could ever say." 
When asked by the Ragplonent how he 
saw his role as a teacher, Cranium responded, 
"I don't think there is anything I can really 
teach anyone about politics that can not be 
learned in a respectable brothel. The things RHpl 
ife«i *i *• > '< -* *, 
Cranium tells student, "Those aren't the kind of melons 1 was in the mood for, honey." 
I have learned there have helped me get off 
on life much more than the crap they taught 
me in class." 
When asked how he felt about the Gays 
and Friends controversy now on campus, 
Cranium responded, "I think it really stinks 
that all these homo's are being allowed to 
come out in the open. In the good old days 
we just took them to a whorehouse and let 
them see how a real man does it." 
In a talk with Crani um's wife, she said of him, "My Dick is the most caring and 
sensitive man I ever met No matter what 
anyone says, he would never force a student 
to come to class in a mini-skirt wearing no 
underwear in order to pass. I know my 
husband, he is a good man." 
Cranium's last words to all those who 
nominated him for teacher of the month 
were, "Thank you and remember, don't 
get sucked into a commitment just 'cause 
you' want to pop the chick." 
Dr. Urea says 
Class Attendance 
can be Harmful to Grades by Foose Balls 
Universal Relatives 
In a study to evaluate the effectiveness 
of class attendance, Dr. Urea has produced 
some amazing discoveries. First, he de­
fined four classes of students: attentive 
listeners, note takers, day dreamers, and 
class cutters. 
As expected, day dreamers did the worst 
grade-wise, but there are indications that 
they retained the most since their subcon­
scious was solely responsible for storing the information. Dr. Urea hopes to investigate 
this in his next study. 
Strangely, note takers were next. It 
seems that they become so obsessed with 
taking every note the professor says and/or 
writes that no information actually enters 
the brain. 
Attentive listeners did surprisingly well. 
They appeared to listen, filter the informa­
tion, and actually learn it. (This method 
may produce undue stress on the brain by 
forcing the creation of neurological con­
nections.) Class cutters were far and away the 
best grade-wise. This group is largely made 
of the unconventional student who cannot 
handle the boredom, stupidity, and imper­
sonality of the classroom. The expected 
stress on the brain is not produced because 
this group only learns the required infor­
mation for the test and then breaks any 
associated neurological gateways. 
Dr. Urea hopes to publish his results in 
a scientific journal as soon as his class-
cutting graduate student finishes the report. 
3 i 
Math Colloquium 
l Dr. Stanley Fish, Definitions, Explanations 
1 
I and Derivatives of 
1 I Mathematical Science Vocabulary 
1 I 1 
1 We will meet at the usual time in the usual place and give definitions for 
1 all of those mysterious words we have used in our announcements all year 
1 in the exponent. 
9 
1 Cookies and milk one-half hour before the lecture — admission charge $1 
1 1 — we're not engineers after all 
1 i 1 —III 
Gc May 22,1991, Wednesday LAMPOON & SATIRE Ragplonent Page R-3 
Charger Cafe 
Causes 
Catastrophe 
by The Wizard 
(Need I say more?) 
"What are these creatures that are taking 
over our city? What is the cause of it all?" 
These are the questions that occupy most 
people's minds these days. A recent inves­
tigation done by the BPI (Bureau of 
Paranormal Investigation) has finally dis­
covered the cause and the origin of the 
creatures. 
These creatures are rumored to be mis­
shapen beasts of unusual characteristics. 
The origin of these creatures has been 
traced to the campus of the University of 
Agony in Humanities, more specifically, 
the cafeteria in the Universal Central. 
It has been concluded that the first 
creatures were the now-former employees 
of that establishment. Speculation has it 
that one of the employees fouled up one of 
the recipes that they were trying to concoct, 
resulting in an explosion releasing tons of 
noxious gas. 
This gas caused anyone breathing it to 
mutate into a monstrous creature. It is be­
lieved that approximately two-hundred 
thousand of these creatures now exist Their 
only desire is to take over the earth. 
The ring-leader of the most supreme 
group is Tapp Nella. He won this position 
through being the most evil of the bunch. 
Other members of the group include Eigoob, 
Yar, Pihc, Nivek, and Dlareg. 
The authorities are warning people about 
these creatures. They are extremely dan­
gerous and should be approached as such. 
The authorities are also offering a reward 
for those brave or stupid enough to confront 
this gruesome bunch. 
humanities anb Social ^Isacfizx o <JH[o ,P 
by Melanie Saysmounds 
ass. news suck-up 
Wt regret to announce tfje closing 
of another fiftp sections in 
liberal &rts prior to 
registration. 3fn fact, toe totU 
be fjolbing only tfjrce classes 
summer term. 
hoto to stoitcf) pour major to engineering 101 
hoto to Stoitcf) pour major to Sbministratibe Science 102 ft tEI)/^ 
Itoto to Stoitcf) pour major to Science - especiallp $f)psics 101 $/£> 
tEfjeSe courses toill all be taugfjt bp 2Br. £>taff. J80 signatures require*). Wt 
trust our majors. 
Ragplonent Page R-4 LAMPOON & SATIRE May 22,1991, Wednesday 
UAH Biology Dept Offers 
Special Health Services Week 
by Dr. Redy Topop Pustule 
alchemy writer 
The UAH Biology department is 
proud to sponsor special health ser­
vices week to students, staff and 
faculty. All testing, drugs, vaccines 
and consultation will be free of 
charge. Each day is reserved for 
special problems. Test results are 
confidential. 
Monday is reserved for urine 
testing. If you have to take a drug 
test soon and are not sure if you are 
going to pass, bring your fresh urine 
sample by the biology department in 
the Science building on Monday. 
Be sure the urine sample is sealed 
tightly and well labeled with your 
name and the drugs to be tested for. 
STD (Sexually Transmitted Dis­
ease) Tuesday is expected to be very 
busy and will be offered again on 
Thursday. 
Diseases to be tested for and pos­
sibly treated will be vaginitis, geni­
tal herpes, crabs, gonorrhea, syphi­
lis and AIDS. 
Symptoms of STD's are stinging 
sensations during urination, abnor­
mal genital discharge, swelling, in­tense/persistent itching and/or le­
sions. 
Simply come to SB 247 on Tues­
day or Thursday between 1 and 5 
PM for STD testing and treatment. 
Please plan to spend 3 to 4 hours. 
Wart Wednesday will be held in 
SB 247 between land 4 PM. Since 
warts are caused by a virus, there is 
no vaccine available for treatment. 
All warts, hand and genital, will be 
remedied with a mild acid. 
STD testing is offered again on 
Thursday. Special priority will be 
given to hockey and soccer players. 
Fecal Friday is set aside to test for 
worms. Fresh stools should be 
brought by the biology department 
between 8 and 11 AM. 
An alternative to the fecal smear 
test is to sleep with a piece of scotch 
tape over the anus. The fecal worms 
are nocturnal and will stick to the 
tape on their nightly strolls. Worms 
on scotch tape are easily seen under 
a microscope. 
Everyone is encouraged to take 
advantage of these special services 
designed for the needs and life styles 
of the UAH populous. USB regains Technological Edge 
by Foose Balls 
Universal Relatives 
After years of being beaten by the 
Japanese, American finally has a chance to 
regain its technological lead on the world. 
Scientists at UAH have perfected the opti­
cal computer and its associated technolo­
gies. The years of neglect in the manufac­
turing of semiconductors by American 
corporations may have actually been the 
best policy. America can jump frog over the 
primitive semiconductor technologies and 
charge into the miracles of optics. 
Dr. Noblecause explains, "While Ja­
pan and Asia have wasted multi-billions in 
capital producing 'electronics,' we have 
nothing. We will have the second coming 
of America. LCD TV's, personal comput­
ers, super computers, RAM chips, CD's, 
car stereos, VCR's, and even cars will all be 
thousands of times better with U.A.H. op­
tics at its core. We will make Huntsville the 
world's 'Silicate' Valley." 
A few dissidents from the University 
of West Northeast Texas claim that the the 
theories are actually their own and UAH 
only made the final breakthrough discovery. 
Also, there are rumors that Dr. Noblecause 
has signed a contract with MITT and will 
leave UAH within the next two hours. Some 
graduate students have complained that Dr. 
Noblecause is receiving all the accolades, 
but they are the ones that in fact did the 
work. These rumors remain unsubstantiated. 
Unfortunately, the ragponent has un­
covered a disturbing side effect of this new 
age revolution, the Valley Boy. A prelimi­
nary investigation has produced the follow­
ing profile: untucked white shirt, beltless Two of Noblecause's research assistants 
grey slacks, thick-rimmed plastic glasses, 
pale ghost-like skin, receding hair line, 
expanding bald spot, predisposition to 
Alzheimer's, and signs of hearing loss. 
Caution, these people may adversely affect 
yourlQ. (It may go up.) Please report any 
sightings to the ragponent. 
Valley Boy Talk 
Out of Wave - Fallen hair part 
Skin Photon - Red neck 
White Lightning - Laser which en­
ters the eye 
Peeking Fiber - Valley Boy using 
microscopic optical fiber and 
lens for "surveillance" purposes 
E=mc^ - uhm, or oh 
1000 Points of Light - Laser over­
heating/exploding 
Black Hole - Good looking Blonde 
Legally Blind - a wanna be Valley 
Boy 
Silicon for Brains - a complete idiot 
CLASSIFIED 
Thursday: Dr. Why Do We Have Liberal Arts Anyway, ways to 
convince curriculum committees that engineering students should 
not have to take general education requirements, sub-specialty 
Pascal as an introduction to another culture. 
Friday: Dr. I Don't Know, expert in the non-ethics of secret weap­
ons research warfare. This lecture is our sop to the philosophy 
department, let's make a good attendance. 
Saturday: Dr. Let's make a Buck, has written extensively on how to 
wrangle DOD dollars in out-of-date technology, secondary specialty 
aerophysics and big guns. 
Sunday: Dr. Why Don't They Eat Cake, author of How to 
Convince your Legislators to Stop Funding Give-away Programs for 
Poor Folks and Increase Funding for the Rich 
All Symposia Catered at the Tom Bevill Center. 
Wine and Cheese before the lectures, Free Filet Mignon 
for attendees. Remember students, attendance at any 
one lecture satisfies half your humanities requirement 
All lectures limited to fifteen minutes and should 
not interfere with our fun. 
There is no charge, of course, 
we are, after all, engineers. WANTED Computers for the 
Computer Classrooms. Anyone 
with PC's at home — don't trade 
them in. Show your loyalty and 
donate them to the Administrative Science Building. 
You don't need the address just follow the traffic jams. 
Help Wan ted... Tired of High Pay and Short Hours? 
Come to the 
University of Agonized Humanities 
as an instructor in the Liberal Arts. 
You will receive incredible lip service from everybody about your value, but 
you will not be troubled by pay raises, or any of those other perks that make 
life so difficult. Few students, large course-load, no research money and you 
can forget anything else in the way of extras. 
Colleagues do know how to RELAX! 
Send resume to Moribund Hall Room 230. 
-El ucri tk *s, en 
Tired of low pay and long hours? 
Tired of all of the responsibility and none of the authority? 
Tired of having to take orders from men who know less 
than you do? Stop it Now (SIN) will be on campus 
to organize this week. SIN is a national union 
aimed at liberating medical technology from men 
whose only claim to fame is that they 
went through a successful program to dehumanize them. 
It's-a-SIN we have to bear the brunt of the professioi 
and receive less pay and respect than the orderlies. 
>w up Tuseday in Nursing BuildingJtojyulOOand sign up. 
May 22,1991, Wednesday LAMPOON & SATIRE Ragplonent Page R-5 
SGA Elections by The Wizard 
Have you guessed yet? 
The election for this year's SGA officers 
was ver-ry unusual. Elected as the new 
president was Big Bird. That's right, the big 
nine-foot yellow thing from Sesame Street. 
As the new vice-president, Ernie was 
elected. Ernie is quite upset that his best 
friend, Bert, wasn't elected for anything, 
but that's alright because Bert is being ap­
pointed to the Arbitrations Board. 
When asked how he would preside over 
the board, he stated "I guess I will rely on 
bully tactics and my unusual sneakiness. I 
will also try to railroad anything that is set 
before me. I am the Arbitrations Board and 
if anyone doesn't like it, tough noogies." 
After being appointed, Bert said "Al­
though I am vice-president of another club 
on campus, namely Muppets & Friends, I 
will still be able to perform my duties here." 
The Cookie Monster was elected as 
Delta 6 inhafrtcinTff spotted call 
Chief Kneeman at once. UAH administrators taking home their pay 
before recent accident. 
Treasurer. Personally, I do not think that 
this is such a good idea since everyone 
knows where the money is going to go-
more cookies. Maybe Bert can keep him in 
line. 
Appointed as the President to the newly 
formed Students for a Clean Campus was 
Oscar. The first project was to clean up 
Oscar's garbage can. After much consider­
ation, the group decided to destroy the old 
can and get him a new one. 
The entire UAH Administration has been 
killed in a freak internal combustion chain-
reaction. Taking over the school is Hitler's 
brain. He has set himself up as the ultimate 
dictator on campus, so we are going to have 
to see whether the SGA elections hold any 
real meaning or not. 
I guess we are going to have to wait and 
see what happens. There is a rumor going 
around that there are aliens from the planet 
Delta-6 in the process of a hostile takeover 
of Huntsville. It is also rumored that these 
aliens are going to develop the entire UAH 
Campus into one gigantic intergalactic 
parking garage to solve their parking 
problem. 
Mr. Batti's 
Barfeteria Special 
On Wednesday nights 
UAH special* 
Fraternities invited 
Featured on SGA Club Cards 
Don't Believe all you Read I!! 
•Charged Double Letters to 
the Editor 
Dear Editor, 
No hazing at UAH? Are you joking? 
Who was that driving the jeep with the 
naked people on the hood round and round? 
Rival Greek 
Dear Editor, 
I am so tired of all that liberal hog-wash 
you put out in that yellow-dog sheet rag you 
put out. 
I hope you all get termites you block­
heads. 
Name withheld by request 
Letter from the Senator, 
Dear Editor, 
Why do you keep running all of that 
Conservative Republican Clap-trap? Don't 
you realize that you are nothing more than 
a tool of the establishment and that your 
only hope for the future lies with us Demo­
crats? 
The Honorable, 
Floral Darner 
Dear Editor, 
I would like to know how they are 
funding the new entertainment submissions 
complex. Is it true that student activity fees 
are being raised to $300 per credit hour? 
Why can't we return to the good ole 
days when student activities fees went to 
funding clubs regardless of how the student 
body felt? 
Sincerely, 
Penelope Petrie Dear editor, 
I am opposed to the funding for Straights 
and Enemies. It says right there in the Bible 
that if you have sex you will burn forever. I 
don't want the $2.61 I spend for student 
activity fees going to a group that advocates 
men and women doing anything together 
besides singing Psalms. 
Fanny Fanatic 
Dear editor, 
Why don't you commie pinkos shut up 
and stop maligning WZYP? Don't you know 
that monopolies are in the best tradition of 
All-American Business Robber Barons? 
Will Doneittoyou 
Dear editro, 
Ewe peeple think ure so smart. All ewe 
ever do is complain and bitch. Cum on over 
to Limestone County where the men are 
men and the sheep are scared and spout 
some of that commie pinko stuff. 
We like are radio peeples hear. And we 
like country muciK. And if yawl don't stop 
yure bellyaching wese gonna burn a cross 
on ure lawn, Understan? 
Grand Dragon & Supreme Wizard 
and local disc jockey 
Dear Editor, 
Why don't you print some more of 
those good sandwich coupons? We sure are 
getting hungry down here at Poor Kollege 
Adults. 
Fraternally Yours, 
Haze — Who Us? 
Tuesday and Thursday* 
Audience Participation 
All UAH students are invited 
to sing at our open mike (except for 
SGA vice presidents with the name 
of Eddie Ditto who happen to be 
Sigma Nus). 
Featured on SGA Club Cards 
•Prices Double for all students with valid Photo identification. 
Ragplonent Page R-6 
What If by Who Knows! 
for the Ragplonent 
One day recently while sitting in class 
listening to yet another boring lecture, (Yea 
you know the kind I'm talking about!) my 
thoughts drifted off into a world of their 
own far, far away from UAH. 
That world was one where if someone 
asked you how you spell sucess it was 
spelled Sucess, not 'Me gonna be an Engi­
neer!' 
While on this journey to Never-Never 
Land, thoughts of What If...! began to haunt 
me. Suddenly I felt like Arsenio Hall. 
The first "What if...." is what if UAH 
would or could somehow get their priorities 
staight concerning what's most important, 
academics or athletics! What I'm referi ng to 
is the recent UAH budget cuts in which 
academic scholarships are to be cut though 
athletic scholarships remain uneffected. 
What if UAH had had a real president 
all along, like the highly respected outgoing 
Joe Moquin or the incoming Dr. Franz, 
instead of the infamous dark cloud president 
referred to as 'King Louie.' 
A real president might have helped this 
fine university progress instead of building 
up campus debts higher than even Donald 
Trump could muster before Maria. 
Oh Yea, What if to pay homage to the 
above mentioned money spender we actu­
ally name the new campus housing Padulo 
Hilton, and instead of hanging a picture of 
him we could play a game of pirates and 
have him walk the plank off the roof top. 
What if to save money we cut out the 
thousands of dollars the UAH administra­
tors spend of student moneyfor the rental of 
a plane to fly them to supposed board meet-
i ngs. Seriously dudes haven't you ever heard 
off AT&T? Do busi ness over the telephone. 
What if in our recent heated SGA elec-
Subterranean Railroad 
Special 
Free 6 inch sandwich with one 
stolen Ragplonent 
Pay double if you steal 50. 
•This offer is not valid for Poor Kollege 
Adults 
jvho have already stolen their quota. Jerks Why get ptomaine at such high prices? 
Don't eat on campus when you can risk life and 
limb on Holmes and join us for indescribably horrible chili!!! 
Thursday & Friday 
The Faculty Five 
All UAH students pay $45.00 
We feature the worst service 
in Huntsville 
to UAH staff from 
the Bursar's office. LAMPOON 
9 >••••• • 
What if it doesn't come soon? 
tions we had supported a new candidate, 
one who knows what's best for the 
students.The students who could better 
represent students, all students, not just the 
some of the students. 
What if the food in the cafeteria was 
edible items you recognized! Better yet, 
what if we just had McDonalds and 
Domino's take over the cafeteria food ser­
vice? Over-indulging might kill us, though 
we'd at least know what we ate! 
What if certain professors on this 
campus had only half as much common 
sense as they do brains. They need to cash 
their monthly pay check before even more 
new paint is bought for Morton Hall. 
What if certain student organizations 
spent half as much time with their studies as 
they do ripping off all the exponents. 
What if UAH finally realized what the 
meani ng of gi vi ng thei r students a real spri ng 
break is! UAH seems to think the definition 
of spring break is saying, "OK, students, 
you have a ten minute break between 
quarters to go to the restrooms." 
What if UAH knew what it is to field a 
real man's sport like football or baseball 
instead of sports originating North of the 
border where ice is a way of life, not by way 
of machine! 
What if UAH new how to provide their 
students with real entertainment like, The 
University of North Alabama, which re­
cently featured one of the hottest rock groups 
The Black Crowes. UAH answered that by 
providing students with a show which 
featured a fat old pool shark! 
What if all UAH's foreign language 
instructors got together and wrote the new 
SGA legislation by-laws in French, Span­
ish and Russian. Then the current SGA 
legislators would understand the meaning 
of what they read about as much as they do 
now! & SATIRE A/ay 22, J"!, Wednesday 
TUITION 
YES, 7 CENTS 
by Another Scandal Monger 
reporter 
On Saturday, May 18, the Budget Advi­
sory Committee met at Taco Bell to discuss 
about a possible tuition increase by 7 cents 
next fall. 
This increase in tuition was proposed by 
the Provost Ghost earlier this month. At the 
meeting, Ghost said, "Dear friends, the US 
is in a recession, UAH is in proration, and I 
will soon be on probation if we do not 
increase the tuition fees very soon." 
Eating his Burrito, he continued, "After 
giving a lot of thought over it, I have decided 
to increase the fees by 7 cents next fall, if 
this is not too much to ask." 
He also remarked, "Our goal is to cut the 
$ 1.4 deficit. Students can be assured that 
they will not have to work overtime to meet 
this demand." 
When asked whether there would be any 
decrease in the activity fees, he commented, 
"Yes, the activity fees, on the other hand, 
will be decreased by 7 cents. I am sure this 
will take a lot of burden away from the 
students." 
This tuition increase resulted in percent-cents 
Provost Ghost 
age increases ranging from 0.00000344% 
to 0.0001% for undergraduates and 
0.00058% to 0.0008% for graduates, de­
pending upon their hourly wages. 
One of the committee members, George 
Michael, spoke to the ragplonent regard­
ing t his matter. He said, "Most of these fees 
go to pay for the expense and management 
of the WLRH Radio Station and the 'Duck 
Pond'." 
Ben Johnson, SGA President, asked, 
"What about the broken vending machine at 
the UC ?" 
One of the Taco Bell employees shouted, 
"We have already taken care of that." 
. -i 
v. • 
May 22,1991, Wednesday LAMPOON & SATIRE Ragplonent Page R-7 
No Choices Top ten lists and other ways to spur lawsuits 
by Darn Good Columnist 
For the exponent 
editor's note: We are sorry that this article 
was not printed in time to help you make 
decisions before the last election, but if you 
cut it out and laminate it you will have it next 
year. 
I'm not really a political person, I 
swear. All that gloom and doom talk about 
pollution, poverty, illiteracy, etc. just de­
presses me. 
But, I just have to take a stand now. 
Morality is on the decline here at UAH. 
It's just too much for a politically-
incorrect, flag-waving, red-blooded 
American to take. 
What is this with that Gays and Friends 
club? Sounds like a communist plot to me. 
Are they trying to say that folks who are 
different actually have rights ? This is the 
south, you know. 
Before you know it, they'll be calling 
this the University of All those Homo­
sexuals! 
But enough of that subject. The point 
is, the UAH student body needs firm, Maggie 
Thatcher type leadership. 
No more of this wishy-washy, vacil­
lating open-mindedness. 
Because of this, I wish to make the 
student body more aware of Mr. Conser­
vative, a truly outstanding candidate for 
SGA president. 
I can honestly say that there are few 
people of Mr. Conservative's character. 
And, there are few people, indeed, who 
can inspire the masses the way Mr. Con­
servative can. 
But, for those of you who may not 
know Mr. Conservative (and to know him is 
to love him), I've objectively gathered a 
few pros and cons to the Conservative 
candidacy. 
Reasons to Vote for Mr. Conservative 
1) Great photo on campaign poster 
2) Knows which fork to use for salad 
3) "Happy-Go-Lucky" personality charm­
ing to young and old alike 
4) He's not Dan Quayle 
5) He's a guy, for God's sake! 
6) Has Jesse Helms'support Mr. Consrvative in mufti 
7) He's really huggable 
8) He's a big hit at those rubber-chicken, 
Republican fundraisers 
9) Meets the minimum requirements for the 
office 
10) Hasn't beaten up a ny transvestite pros­
titutes 
Reasons to Not Vote for Mr. Conserva­
tive 
1) Thinks Hall and Oates give an exciting 
concert 
2) Breathes hard at the mention of Guy Hunt 
3) His goose-stepping across campus un­
nerving to pregnant women and liberal-
minded professors 
4) Has a "I'm the NRA and Proud of it" 
bumper sticker on his car 
5) Turned in a close relative for tax evasion 
6) Still thinks Mr. Reagan was good for the 
country 
7) Has contributed to the Richard M. Nixon 
Memorial Library 
8) Writes fan letters to David Duke 
9) Campaign photo isn't really all that great 
10) If Mr. Conservative were president, 
who'd write all those witty letters to the 
exponent? 
Well, I can only hope this article is of 
help to the three or four students who will 
take the time to vote today and tomorrow. 
Well, the die has been cast. Let the best 
man, err, person, win. 
As grandma might have said, Stay 
sweet, y'all. 
Ragplonent Staff 
You didn't think we'd use our names, did you? RoLUNg AmBiEnCe 
by Kitty Kelly Jr.ette 
entertainment snoop 
A recent problem here on campus has 
become the students' latest fad of cheap 
entertainment Now, while students wait in 
line to register, they have the chance to 
relax thanks to the Submission Department's 
new entertainment policy. 
In the past, while standing in line to 
turn in green registration cards, or to be 
logged into the computer or even to pay 
tuition, students' minds actually began to 
atrophy. There were actually two reported 
cases last year of students dying of bore­
dom. 
With the new system, according to the 
Director of Submission, Dr. Won Kroger, 
less student minds will be wasted, leaving 
professors more to work with during the ten 
week term. 
The new entertainment complex re­
places part of the University Offcenter 
usually taken up by the submissions pro­
cess. Where once was the terminal com­
puters room now stands a video arcade, and 
university tapes now houses Bill and Ed's 
Pizzeria. 
Where students used to pay their 
sumbission fees and tuition by check near 
the Misinformation Booth, there are now 
bleachers where students can watch male 
and female mud-wrestling. 
Even the upstairs Cash Register's Of­
fice has not escaped the entertainment revo­
lution. The wall between this office and the 
Purser's Office was torn down and a 250 
scat theatre was built. The theatre shows 
popular Monty Python movies during reg­
istration, and will be opened during exam 
week showing that cult favorite Rocky 
Horror Picture Show. 
This new submissions system went into 
effect this past spring quarter and so far 
response from students has been good, ac­
cording to Kroger. 
"This new complex is great. It's like 
mind-boggling," said Peppy Peter, a 
sophomore in Underwater Accounting. 
"Oh, it's like, totally, rad," raved Muffy 
Valley. "It's like, gag-me-with a spoon you 
know it's rad." 
Valley is a Language major and a full-
time late registree. "It's like you know such That's ambience, not ambulance! 
a hassle trying to you know remember to 
turn in that itty-bitty card during you know 
that early time. And now with this, I can be 
you know entertained you know." 
"I think it's great," perked Pamela 
Peppy, a member of Gamma Mu and win­
ner of this year's Sororitiy's Most Perky 
Sister contest. "Usually I'm very good 
about registering early, but now that I can be 
entertained, I'm going to start registering 
late." 
While students are raving about the 
new system, Kroger's fellow administra­
tors were less than pleased. 
"Many people are wondering where 
the money is coming from," commented B. 
John Hunter, director of Student Liaisons. 
"I mean we're here to show students that 
atrophy, death and boredom are the realities 
of life, not to play baby-sitter for the next 
five years." 
'This is money that was scrupulously 
saved by the submissions office," responded 
Kroger. "Hunter's just mad because she's 
trying to expand Darry Bailler's office and 
wanted part of my territory." 
"Kroger has gotten that money by il­
legally trashing several student programs of 
Bailler's, including counseling peers and 
student tutorial peers," charged Hunter. 
"I got that money legally," Kroger re­
sponded. 'I've made several contracts with 
outside people and the office is still saving 
money." 
Kroger stated that i n the future he would 
like to add a deli, seafood department, and 
a pharmacy. 
We are proud to induct the above 
into the RoLLiNg AmBiEnCe Trash Can 
located in Morton Downey Hall...By the 
way, would the people who found Dunk 
please return him to the Ragplonent ? We 
need our editor back. 
*@&$#%@*! 
by Censored Censored 
honest reporter 
Censored censored censored 
censored censored music censored. 
Censored censored bad censored 
censored censored censored sui­
cide censored censored PMRC 
Censored individual censored 
censored censored laws. 
Censored censored censored 
censored art censored censored 
Jesse Helms. Censored censored, 
"Censored censored [expletive] 
censored, censored." Censored 
pornographic censored censored 
censored. Censored funding cen­
sored. 
Before censored censored 
censored censored censored chil­
dren censored. Censored censored [jlll i censored 
censored Guns N' Roses censored 
censored. 
Censored censored censored 
censored freedom of speech. 
The camera shy 
Business Manager 
Mary Ann Hammonds Layout Editor Ad Design 
Lysandra Hice Lara Lee 
Photographers 
Lysandra Hice, Ricky Howard, and Rudy Setiawan Computer Operators 
Tom Thammachote 
Reporters 
Sean Chenoweth, Kathryn Clark, Emalee Craft, Patrick Haden, 
Joseph Larney, Karin Licht, Napoli Oza, David Rogers, Vandana 
Sharma, and Marti Thurman 
Circulation . 
James Carter Intern Reporters 
Nalluri Satya Auresh, Daniel Woo Typesettists 
Tara Gray 
Karin Licht 
Johnny West exponent L—, e<*,tor JL Production Supervisor Doug Brewer 
Marian Delaney Sampson Patrick M. Haden 
Assistant Ad Design 
David Anderson News editor 
Wallace 
Secretary 
Karin Licht Copy Editor 
Steve Whipple 
Assistant Business Manger 
Lei-Leni Parks Entertainment Editor 
Johnny West Sports editor 
Jennifer Grace 
Assistant News Editor 
Monica Simmonds Assistant entertainment editor 
Katie Ceci 
Abdul Jarrar Shane Ellenburg Srilakshmi Malladi Ken Shelton 
