   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
PERCEPTIONS OF SPORT INJURIES OF YOUNG ELITE SWIMMERS  
Mari Lehtinen  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                 Master’s Thesis in Sport and  
Exercise Psychology  
Spring 2012  
Department of Sport Sciences  
University of Jyväskylä  
 
 
Content:  
 
Abstract  
1. INTRODUCTION  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  4 
2. SPORT INJURIES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  6 
2.1 Definition of injuries  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  7 
2.2 Physical factors causing sport injuries  ................................ ................................ ....................  8 
2.3 Psychological factors causing sport injuries  ................................ ................................ ...........  9 
3. WELL -BEING OF ATHLETES  ................................ ................................ .............................  12 
3.1 Stress Management  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  15 
3.2 Motivation  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  17 
4. TREATMENT OF SPORT INJURIES ................................ ................................ ...................  21 
4.1  Rehabilitation  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  24 
4.2  Physical rehabilitation  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  24 
4.3 Psychological rehabilitation ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 26 
4.4 Prevention of sport injuries  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 30 
5. PURPOSE OF THE STUDY  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 32 
6. METHODS  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  33 
7. RESULTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  35 
8. DISCUSSION  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  41 
9. CONCLUSION  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  49 
9.1 Ethical consideration  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  49 
9.2 Limitations  of the study  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  49 
9.3 Practical Implications  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  50 
10. REFERENCES ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................  51 
APPENDIXES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 59 
 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
 
I would like to exp ress my deepest gratitude to Professor Taru Lintunen,  
who guided laudably  thru the process  of this Master’s thesis . I would also 
like to th ank my fellow students of the Master’s program in Sports and 
Exercise Psychology . Moreover,  I would like to thank my parents  for the 
unwavering support.  Finally yet importantly, I would like to thank  my 
spouse Markus Mäntynen  for his emotional and intellectual support .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
     ABSTRACT  
 
Mari Lehtinen, 2012. Perceptions of sport injuries of young elite 
swimmers.  Department of Sport Sciences. University of Jyväskylä. 
Master’s Thesis of Sport and Exercise Psychology.  64 pages.  
 
Sport injuries occur  at all levels of sport. Sport injury can limit or end 
athlete´s career. It is important to find out ways how sport psychology 
can prevent and treat sport in juries.  This can be done for example , by 
having impacts on  mental and physical capabilities of athletes.  Aim 
was to study rehabilitation process of injured swimmers according to 
the sport psychology point of view.  The aim was to study experiences 
of elite swimmers during recovery process. Secondly, this study 
helped to describe and understand possible career ending fact ors after 
an injury among young elite swimmers. Study was concluded by 
interviewing five s wimmers from a swimming team. Thematic  
interviews were done in one week period in Jyväskylä. Interviews 
were transcribed and analyzed by comparing them with other 
interviews.  
Main themes in this study were career before injury, psychological 
changes during injury, resources of rehabilitation  and time after 
injury.  Core themes were achievements, reactions to injury, 
rehabilitation and motivation.  Themes in this study were divided into 
core themes, themes and subthemes. Results suggest that swimmers 
wish to get more medical and psychological attention after an injury 
and during a rehabilitation process. Most swimmers had only medical 
help even if they felt they could use  motivational help during 
rehabilitation process. Stressful situation occur while tryi ng to reach 
pre injury level . Findings of this research  support  development for  
lightened and modified exercises, in order  to avoid shoulder abrasion  
and loss of motivati on among  young elite swimmers.  Advantageously , 
literature review disclosed multidisciplinary  role of a coach  as a less 
studied field , thus creating need for further research.  
 
Keywords: Swimming, Injury, Rehabilitation, Physiotherapy, 
Motivation, Coaching , Re-entry to sport , Multidisciplinary role  
 
 
4 
 
1. INTRODUCTION  
 
Sports injuries result from acute trauma or repetitive stress associated with athletic 
activities.  In many cases, these types of injuries are due to overuse of a part of the 
body when participat ing in a certain activity  (Renström  et al. 2002, 15 -17).  
Additionally sport injuries occur while par ticipating in organized sports, 
competitions, training sessions, or organized fitness activities. Common high injury 
risk sports are , for example football , soccer, basketball, cricket, volleyball, skiing, 
tennis as well as contact sports as a whole (Frisch et al. 2009).  Sports injuries can 
affect bones or soft tissue (ligaments, muscles, tendons). Causes to sport injuries 
vary greatly. Accidents, poor train ing practices or improper gear can cause injuries 
most often. Some people get hurt because they are not in shape  or their diet is not 
good enough . Not warming up or stretching enough can also lead to injuries ( Mero,  
Nummela, Keskinen  & Häkkinen  1997 , 251  -253).  
 
If warming up and stretching is not practiced proper ly, injuries can happen and  lead 
to a rehabilitation and recovery  process. Injuries happen in all levels of sports, elite 
level and beginners. Psychological skills are important during training an d 
competition. Emotio nal reactions appear as a cycle  (Chang -Y. Jung -Huei & Tsung -
Min,  2010) , which is divided  into different parts. Distress reflects effect on injury on 
emotional equilibrium including anxiety, depression and fear. Denial triggers events 
creating psychological tension. It is important to determine coping skills including 
moving beyond passive acceptance and proactive challenging knowledge and skills. 
Emotional response to loss and threat is a continuum from normal reaction to 
profound lifes tyle disruption. The ability to remain injury free is l inked to athletic 
success (Heil  2000).  
 
Swimming is one of the safest sports. Still there are few injuries. One of the biggest 
injury types is shoulder injuries and other upper part chronic overuse inj uries. In 
study of Ristolainen et. al. (2009) result shows, that swimmers overuse injuries are 
mostly located in shoulder region, and there are no gend er differences. Reason for 
this may be training intensity. Competitive swimmers a re training 8 -10 times p er 
week (Ristolainen et al. 2009 ). 
5 
 
 
Rehabilitation is always a process that is mentally and physically difficult or at least 
unfamiliar . This  can lead to finishing of practicing sports. Thus, it is important to 
treat athletes mental recovering as well as p hysical injury. If either mental or 
physical aspects are not treated well enough, it can lead to either finishing career or 
other injuries later on. Rehabilitation differs, based on injury type, pain level, 
physical symptoms and athlete’s mental state. The re is need for an immediate 
rehabilitation after an injury in terms of physical and psychological first aid.  There 
are different choices of physical and mental rehabilitation. Physical rehabilitation 
can be made by physiotherapist, manual or machine thera py. Mental rehabilitatio n is 
often by imagery (Renström  et al. 2002.  119 -120,163  -168).  
 
 Severity of injuries varies from bruises and minor cuts into spinal cord damage 
leading to paralysis; these described injuries can lead to pauses or even forces an 
athlete to stop his career.  Medical expenses can vary from type of injury, sport and 
country of an athlete. It is important for an athlete to acknowledge possible risks. 
This will help an athlete proceeding in right way and take pre -emptive actions. 
Though , it can take long time to learn right exercise techni que and proper conditions 
(Mero  et al. 2007,  456). It is easier to prevent injuries than treat them.  
 
From mental and psychological point of view, injuries are always difficult to take 
care of. Humans are combination of psychosocial and physical factors.  It is 
essential to understand psychological reasons and its effects on every sport injury. 
Every case is different and people react differently. Thus, it is important to 
understand this phenomena and b ehaviora l reactions of people (Renström  et al. 
2002.19  -49). Role of psychology is as important as physical therapy is. Both can be 
combined by achieving best possible results. In research, there is strong support for 
the cognitive appraisal perspective ( Brewer &  Tripp  2005, 319  -329).  
 
 
6 
 
2. SPORT INJURIES  
 
During exercising and sports activities, there is always a risk for injuries . Sport 
injuries are defined as  injuries that happen during sports. Injuries differ from field of 
sports and an athlete. Types of injury and grade of severity , will lead to various kind 
of rehabilitation methods (Mero  2007  454 -456). Coaching is in key element to 
prevent athlete’s injury. Coach can teach useful methods for an athlete of injury 
prevention. Outer conditions for injury prevention are proper equipment , hygiene 
and training circumstances. Inner conditions are food and psychological training. 
Different sport types have their own injuries and individual  ways for prevention. 
(Renström  et al. 2002.19  -49)  
 
Sport injuries can affect on several levels of  well-being. These are physical, 
emotional  and social well -being. Physical well -being includes pain, rehabilitation, 
physical changes of athletes’ body and either permanent or temporary physical 
restrictions. Emotional well -being  includes feelings of loss and grief, trauma and 
rehabilitation. Social well -being includes dependence of others, separation from 
family and friends, new relationships and maybe loss of social roles. Self -concept 
includes loss of sense of control, dealing with altered self -image, threat to important 
life goals and values, as well as necessity for decis ion making under stress (Russel  
2011).  
 
According to Glazer (2009) there are always both psychological and physiological 
aspects after sport injuries. 5 -19% of injured athletes rep ort psychological distress, 
which  is similar than treating mental health problems which occur after injury . If 
athletes return to sport before th ey are  ready, that can lead to anxiety, depression, re -
injury or decrease of performance  (Glazer 2009 , 185 -189).  Study of Ivarsson (2008) 
is representing four significant predictors explaining sport injuries. These predictors 
are life event stress, somatic trait anxiety, mistrust and negative coping. Result show 
that these factors combined ca n explain 23% of injuries occurred in the study 
(Ivarsson  2008, 1  -6, 11  -15). 
 
 
7 
 
2.1 Definition of injuries  
 
In ye ar 1998 William and Andersen  created the  model of injury  antecedents. That is 
a stress -based model of athletic injury. Model includes issues r elated to injury. 
These are personality of an athlete, history of stressors and coping resources. Stress 
response includes cognitive appraisal and physiological and attentional changes. 
Potential stressful a thletic situation is included in the  model as wel l (Andersen &  
Williams  2007) .  Fuller at al. states that injury is “Any physical complaint sustained 
by a player that results from a match or  training  irrespective of the need for medical 
attention or time  loss from football activities. An injury that resu lts in a  player 
receiving  medical attention is referred  to as a medical -attention  injury and an injury 
that results is a player being unable to take a full part  in future footbal l training or 
match play as a time-loss injury”  (Fuller et al. 2006).    
 
According to study of Udry and Andersen, it is important to examine different skills.  
By examining the stress response, history of stressors, personality, coping resources 
and interventions or preventions it is easier to see, what are possible factors and 
underlying mechanisms for the relationships between stress and athletic injury. 
Based on this model, there is relationship between muscle tension, stress, history of 
stressors and life events. Also based on this model, there are some handful  methods 
to preve nt injuries. These are reducing stress reactivity throughout the cognitive 
appraisal of potentially stressful events. Also by dampening the physiological 
activation and attention disruptions associated with the stress response. Injury 
prevention can be pro gressive muscle relaxation, stress inoculation training or 
mental skills training ( Udry &  Andersen  2008). 
 
With every type of sport, there are different kinds of injuries. For example , 
swimmers can  have ear infections more often than other athletes. Baseba ll players 
have o ften shoulder problems (Nykänen 1987, 130 -148). Sport injuries are injuries 
that most commonly occur during sports or exercise. Some sports injuries result 
from accidents, others are due to poor training practices, improper equipment, and  
lack of conditioning, insufficient warm up and stretching. Common injuries are 
different from sports to sports, like karate, handball, American football, judo, ice 
8 
 
hockey and basketball. Sports can vary between countries and this is creating 
different  injuries  (Ristolainen et al. 2010) . Also inju ries can be different among  
athlete s and some sports are more vulnerable to injuries than the others. If an athlete 
recognizes risks for certain injury types, he can proactively avoid possible creation 
of injury. T his is not the only method to prevent injuries, but it can at least lower 
possibility to get injured in specific sport types ( Mero  et al. 1997, 251  -253).  
 
Growth factor has to be taken into consideration, when discussing about possibility 
and prevention o f sport injuries. Growing continues until 17 -18 years old (girls ) and 
until 20 years old (boys)  (Vuori, Taimela &  Kujala  2005, 584  -599).  This is 
important  factor  to acknowledge , while designing training programs.  There are 
certain methods in order to pr event sport injuries. One of these methods is to control 
and limit total workload of exercises, based on individual abilities. Another method 
is to use right and safe equipments and to follow predefined safety procedures before 
any exercise. Also, warming up and stretching are key factors fo r every workout 
(Vuori, Taimela &  Kujala  2005, 584  -599).  
 
 
2.2 Physical factors causing sport injuries  
 
Physical injuries ar e caused by different forces, thus affecting  in different body 
parts. Injuries and rehabilitat ion differs based on sports and athletes. Level of injury 
is always different b etween athletes, thus there can  be several methods to cope with 
injuries. Treatment has to be based on level of injury and combination of 
psychosocial and physical factors  (Mero  2007 , 454- 456). Physical injuries happen 
often due to muscle imbalance issues, high speed collisions, overtra ining or after 
physical fatigue  (Weinberg &  Gould  2007, 448  -449).  
 
In the study of sport identity and sport participation, former has been expla ined to be 
important issue  (Lundberg, Taniguchi, McCormick &  Tibbs  2011) .  This is due to 
individual and cultural attitudes can vary a lot. Sport identity and participation 
differs in between eastern and western hemisphere. Personal goals and handling 
different situations at special events or during practice tours abroad can create 
cultural misunderstandings. Often competitions are against athletes from other 
9 
 
cultures, who have been training and living with their culture limits and regulations. 
Thus, athlet es respecting each others from different cultural backgrounds are 
important.  Orientation to injury and recovery from trauma directly relates to cultural 
backgrounds, consisting of local regulations of an athlete and how he has been 
taught to act in variou s situations. An athlete can be either task or ego oriented and 
this is affecting for recovery results from any injury. When all these cultural, ethical 
and other issues are combined together, the result of an athlete to handle an injury, 
coming from diffe rent background, may be difficult to understand to others (Patrick , 
Cheung, Lydia  2007, 5, 66  -81). 
 
 
2.3 Psychological factors causing sport injuries  
 
Besides physical factors there are always psychological factors included. These 
factors are for example stress level and certain predisposing attitudes (Weinberg &  
Gould  2007, 448  -449).  Accordi ng to m odel of st ress and athletic injury  (Andersen 
& Williams 1988)  sport participants might  experience stressful situations such as  a 
demanding p ractice or crucial competition.  These include  their history of stressors 
(i.e. life event stress, daily h assles, past injury history), personality characteristics  
(i.e., hardiness,   locus  of  control,   sense  of  coherence,  competitive  trait anxiety , 
achievement motiva tion,  sensation seeking), and coping resources (i.e., general 
coping behaviors,   social support, stress management and mental  skills, and 
medication) contribute interactively or in isolation to  the  stress response . The  
central hypothesis  of the   mo del is that  individuals   with   a   history  of many   
stressors,   personality   characteristics that tend   to   exacerbate   the   stress  
response,   and   few  coping   resources  will when placed  in a stressful situation, 
appraise the situation as  more stressful and exhibit greater physiological activation 
and attentional disruptions  compared to  individuals  with  the   opposite 
psychosocial  profile  (Andersen  & Williams 1988).  Self‐ determination  theory  
(SDT)  is a macro‐theory  of human  motivatio n, personality development and well -
being . Focus of the theory is on volitional or self - determined behavior, and the 
social and cultural conditions promoting it  (Ryan &  Deci  2000) . 
 
10 
 
One way to reduce risk of injury is to acknowledge psychological factors associated 
with injuries.  Psychological reactions to different situations are individual and these 
can be for example fear of re -injury, feelings of hopes and dreams being shattered, 
lack of attention, isolation, negat ive relationships or depression  (Maffu lli & Baxter -
Jones  1995) . These issues are to be taken seriously, and with psychological help 
these can be avoided and treated. Former issues combined with physical symptoms, 
like pain, can create severe complications. These m atters can  be treated with ski lled 
personnel in physical a nd psychological rehabilitation  (Russel  & Laurier  2011).  
 
Stress management technique is important matter, especially during rehabilitation 
process. For bystanders, it may be sometimes difficult to unde rstand an injured 
athlete  (Edwards & Beale  2011).  There are so many issues going on in athlete’s life 
at the moment of injury, so it is better to find out what those feelings are. It is 
important to know that after an injury, an athlete is not worth less. An athlete have an 
opportun ity to return to his place after a period of recovery –if he experience the 
returning plan is realizable and worth of try. If an athlete has a fear that his place is 
given permanently to someone else, circumstances for his recovery process may be 
altered. This fear can  be removed by promising to an athlete, that he can come back 
anytime –for sure. Thus, emotions of an athlete can vary a lot. Below is described 
five stage grieving response process that athletes goes thru during his injury 
recovery process. T hese stages are, denial, anger, bargaining, depression and 
acceptance and reorganization. There are also three general categories of emotional 
responses. These are injury relevant information processing, emotional upheaval and 
reactive behavior and positiv e outlook and coping. Other reactions are identity loss, 
fear and anxiety, lack of confidence and p erformance decrements (Weinberg  & 
Gould  2007, 448 -455).   
 
Fear of re -injury, anxiety and questioning of athletes ’ personal abil ities to recover 
are key elem ents after an injury and during rehabilitation process. One of the major 
issues with injur ies is lack of motivation on a part of an  injured athlete, resulting 
from the symptom of emotional distress (Weinberg &  Gould  2007, 448  -458). Lynch 
says in his artic le in 1988 that increase of sport injuries are often caused by 
psychological emotions. These are for example stress, panic, a nxiety, tension and 
11 
 
fear (Lynch  1988, 161  -167).  
 
There are different signs of poor adjustment to an injury. These are for example , 
rapid mood swing, withdrawal, obsessions or grief. Grief i s one of the first feelings 
which  athletes have right  after injury. Others symptoms are denial, anger bargaining, 
depression, acceptance and reorganization. Shock is both a physical and a mental 
issue. If this is not treated correctly, situation can lead to worse and stronger 
psychological illnesses may occur. One of the biggest emotions is the loss of 
identity, which can happen often after an injury. This can lead to bargaining 
situation or rationa lizing to avoid the reality of the situation. There are other 
reactions to an injury that can be caused by having sufficient time to  worry and 
psychological stress  (Weinberg &  Gould  2007, 448  -458).  
 
Adjusting to an injury is one of the most important issu es during rehabilitation of an 
injured athlete. Adjustment process can be difficult, though is one of the key factors 
to beginning the healing process mentally and physically. Emotional reactions to 
injury are as important as physical reactions are. Physic al care and psychological 
care goes hand in hand and both are equally important. There can be setbacks and 
other problems during rehabilitation, so psychological skills are very important. 
Moreover, social support and coping skills are important during and  after 
rehabilitation process. Most athlete s can have their individual injury treatmen t and a 
recovery plan. That  provide s emotional support, physical goals and realistic, 
optimistic and positive goals (Weinberg &  Gould 2007  448- 458).   
 
Most often people think a recovery process only as a surgical treatment and a 
physical therapy. This is only part of injury period. There is always several feelings 
and psychological care given to an athlete. This stage can be the most important part 
of the recovery process . This is important in sight of athlete’s come -back to reach to 
the same level in sports –before the injury occurred. If athlete’s body is ready for a 
come -back, but his mind is not, he cannot manage and keep up his performance  
level  (Tracey  2008).  
 
12 
 
3. WELL -BEING OF ATHLETES  
 
In order to succeed, it can be advisable for an athlete to dedicate their lives to the 
sport. This does not include only training and competing. Important factors are also 
nutrition, psychological preparation, technical instructions and p hysical training year 
around  (Dolan, Houston &  Martin  2011).  It is challenging to know what the proper 
amount of training is. Not too little, in order to establish continuous improvement 
for skills and physical abilities, and not too much in order to avoi d injuries and 
overtraining (Goss  1994). There are several indications that affects on injury and 
stress. An individual’s personality and history of stressors are affecting together with 
coping resources to stress response. A stress response includes cogni tive appraisals 
and physiological intentional changes. These are also affected by interventions.  
 
The personality of an athlete together with coping resources can be developed. 
Potential stressful athletic situations , for example personal concerns, or oth er 
concerns caused by weather or other issues leading to injury can be developed by 
affecting to stress response. This model is the good example how potential injury 
can be avoided. When injury happens, it is good to know what caused it and what 
potential situations led into injury. When this information is available, it is easier to 
treat and prevent further injury . Stress related injuries can happen  by mental or 
physical causes. Learning to cope with stress is essential factor in order to release 
negative  symptoms and to cover them wi th positive symptoms (Crust  2002).  
 
In terms of psychological coaching, essential factors for athletes are combining 
practice and life outside of sports, motivation, setting of milestones and goals and to 
be able to relax phys ically and mentally.  Also, it is important to be continuously 
ready to practice and compete. Every sport has its own styles to practice and 
compete. An a thlete has to be able to manage with these unique needs. These needs 
and requirements are physical and mental shape, duration of performance, repeats, 
recovering and being able to do his best during that short moment of performance. 
Managing with other athletes as competitors is important. If an athlete cannot 
manage pressure from other athletes, he cannot win and do his best. To improve and 
gain better results is important as a milestone for an athlete. Concentration is 
13 
 
extremely sensitive and needs good psychological skills  (Chang -Y. Ju ng-Huei &  
Tsung -Min 2010) .   
 
There are always external factors interru pting concentration and for most of these 
cases athletes can prepare beforehand. These factors can be media and other people 
actively critiquing or asking explanations after the performance. Also, there can be 
pre-estimated interruptions like awarding cere monies. Sometimes concentration can 
be difficult to handle. This can create increased pressure for a next event or a 
performance. Earlier mentioned can cause symptoms to athlete’s motivation to 
continue his career. An a thlete has to learn tactics how to de al with media and other 
psychological stress  (O´Brien  2000) . Physical and mental risk of injury differs a lot 
with different kind of sports and athlete s. (Mero et al.  2007, 215 -219).  
 
An individual athlete can  create psychologically optimal conditions. Al l athletes are 
not in elite level, thus training conditions can be different. Psychologically athletes’ 
own thoughts and ideas are as important as training with coach and other athletes. 
An a thlete can have milestones in between bigger goals in order to be  well 
motivat ed all the time. Training has  to be in balance all the time. There are other 
issues to deal with an athlete and support group surrounding him. These support 
groups are family, friends and other athletes and coach. Also financial issues are in 
major role. When an athlete doesn’t have to worry about money, he can concentrate 
bette r to his goals. Training has  to be of high quality and well planned ahead. There 
can be proper amount of training to be sure that there are continuous improvements, 
even  small.  
 
It is important to have methods for an athlete to  be able to see his results and how he 
has been improving –or not.  It is essential for an athlete to see concrete milestones. 
This helps an athlete to understand correlation for the coaching strat egy and can 
keep him motivated for the ultimate goal  (Milton  2010) . Social  relations are 
important, because life is not only competing or practicing. If there is not enough 
support from family, friends or other possible people, an athlete cannot reach 
incrementally better results. It is good to improve psychological skills to manage 
better with social life and sponsors. This will help an athlete to improve training 
14 
 
skills more intensively and better in psychological aspect ( Mero  et al. 2007, 219  -
221).  
 
Research  of San Jose  show,  that injury is a very traumatic event  and causes often 
negative emotions. Psychological adjustment is critical and varies every injury case.  
Psychological process depends on injury type. Psychological recovery varies based 
on injury  type, like overuse or acute type of injuries. Males seem to have different 
injuries than females. Also males tend to develop more positional identities meaning 
fear of intimacy, than females have more fear of separation. High stress can increase 
possibili ty of injury or at least increase fear of injury and re -injury ( San Jose  2003, 
1, 434  -459).  
 
Based on article of Young - Eun Noh  et al.  2005 coping skills are  important, thus 
athlete s can have their own co ping skills, even before an injury. Development of  
coping skills is always a proce ss that takes time and patience  –not to forget 
knowledge. Without coping skills it is more difficult to face and cope with an injury . 
Mental and physical stress is easier with already existing coping sk ills. Social 
support i s creating prerequisites for surviving skills, thus being important factor 
during rehabilitation and in everyday life. Social support can be anything that 
athlete s have and can be from any social network (Young - Eun Noh  et al.  2005, 3, 
79 -90). 
 
Depending on an injury type and other related factors, it is easier to see athlete ’s 
injury in a bigger picture:  time before, during and after the injury. Although it is 
important to acknowledge that stress does not exist outside the individual, thus not 
all people are responding negatively to potentially  stressful situations (Mitchell  
2011).  Reasons  why stress can be part of injury is that with stressful situations an 
athlete might have narrowing and excessive muscular tension, which are thought to 
increase the cha nces of sustaining an injury. Stress as itself is not always reason to 
an injury. Attitudes of an athlete might predispose him to an injury. If an athlete has 
wrong attitudes towards his career and sport, risk of injury might increase (Stress 
and injury mo del).  
 
15 
 
There is a lack of theoretical models and frameworks explaining what psychosocial 
factors are associated with sport injury even if there are plenty of different studies. 
There is no right or wrong model –all models are from differ ent perspectives  
(Andersen &  Williams  2007) . There can be relationship between athletic injuries 
and psychological factors as essentially stress -related. With some athletes 
psychological aspects can be totally forgotten, leading to bad results and possible 
injuries. ( Mero  et al. 2007, 215  -239).  
 
 
3.1 Stress Management  
  
There are different stages of stress. First stage is an alarm face, when human body is 
showing, whether an indi vidual can either  choose  fight or run  mode  from the source 
of stress. Second stage is adapting, when human body is trying to adapt to new 
stressful situation. Third face is fatigue when body functions are decreasing, because 
of the overload. Better results can be gained, when stressors can be reduced in any 
part as soon as possible ( Andersen &  Willia ms 1988 ). Positive stress leads to good 
results, while negative stress leads to failure or even injuries. Stress can be defined 
as a biological term referring to the consequences of the failure of a human or 
animal body to respond appropriately to emotiona l or physical threats to the 
organism, whether actual or imagined. Every human’s reaction to stress is unique 
and different to the others. Positive stress leads to good outcomes like concentration, 
optimal vitality level and euphoria. Negative stress leads  to harmful feelings, low 
concentration level, somatic problems, irritability and restless ( Andersen &  
Williams 1988 ).  
 
Most often stress is caused by different positive and negative stress reactions. In 
terms of athletes, these negative reactions are har mful feelings, failure of 
concentration, somatic problems and squeamishness . Also weakness is negative 
stress factor. Positive stress factors in terms of athletes are good feeling and good 
concentration, optimal vitality level and feeling strength. These f eelings are felt at 
least during competition and during trainings. There are different ways to interpret 
these feelings. One way is to assess and check abilities and challenges. Also earlier 
16 
 
experiences are in major role, because present issues are shaped from earlier issues. 
Media and publicity affects on people at some at some level ( Mero  et al. 2007, 229  -
231).  
 
In today’s society people tend to be active all the time. Trend in economy is, if there 
is possibility to do things cheaper or with less people,  they will implement that 
strategy. That causes stress to people to lose their jobs. Within sports, there are 
stress factors like a need to be a better athlete. Stress can be also good thing, not 
always negative as it sounds. Without stress, people cannot get as much done as with 
little amount of stress. This positive effect of stress is called eustress.  There is only 
a short line between good amount of stress and too much of it. A stressed person 
eats, smokes and drinks too much while they don’t or can’t exercise enough.  
 
People react to stress factors differently and with different symptoms, either 
mentally or physically. Recognizing stress factors is a first step to recover from that. 
Sometimes it is difficult to see when person is too stressed. Ways to  manage with 
stress is to have less work, learn to say no, enjoy life by doing something fun, share 
responsibilities, do proper amount of workouts and take care with all aspects. 
Relaxation is one of the main ways to reduce stress. Relaxing balances and op ens 
mind to new thoughts, increases flexibility, increases blood  circulation and helps to 
reach balanced health and fitness regime. Music and workout ar e the best ways to 
relax (Sandlund  & Norlander,  2000).  
 
There are different te rms related to motivation and stress. Arousal is intensity 
dimensions of motivation at a particular moment. That is not automatically related 
either positive or negative event. Anxiety is a negative term referred to nervousness, 
worry and apprehension, ass ociated with arousal of the body. There are cognitive 
and somatic anxiety components, depending on the degree of physical activation 
perceived. State anxiety refers to ever -changing mood component. That is more 
formal emotional state. Stress can be either positive or negative. Stress occurs when 
there is imbalance between mental and physical demands. There are different scales 
to measure stress level. One scale is the four -stage stress process. That includes 
environmental demands , perception of demands, str ess response and behavioural 
17 
 
consequences. After stress, uncertainty is a second major situational source of stress. 
Also self esteem af fects on stress level (Weinberg &  Gould  2007, 78  -86). 
 
 
3.2 Motivation  
  
Motivation is in a key role when elite athlete s are returning to sports after injury. 
There is a relationship between motivation of an athlete and returning to a sport. 
Psychological outcomes of returning to a sport are related to level of motivation. 
With external motivation, an athlete feels desire to come back to sports, but there 
might be external pressure from a coach or other people. An athlete might feel that 
he is letting his team down, if he won’t return. With internal motivation, an athlete 
has own strong feelings to return and motives to con tinue his career. An athlete is 
able to return to his pre injury level with intrinsic motivation. Athletes who desire to 
learn about his injury and focus on rehabilitation and returning to sports are 
intrinsically motivated (Po dlog & Eklund  2005; Ninedek &  Kolt 2000).  
 
Motivation is in a key role during rehabilitation process. Sport psychologist can use 
goal setting, relaxation, imagery, positive self -talk and social support groups to 
enhance athlete s´ motivation during rehabilitation process. Combining al l these 
strategies, motivation of an athlete can  be high through rehabilitation process. It is 
difficult for an athlete to keep up motivation alone and without further help. 
Communication is necessary with support group. Especially in youth sports there ar e 
several group of people that has to be able to work together in positive motivation. 
Parents, team leaders and athletes can be able to work with positive atmosphere and 
good motiva tion to get good results (Wiese &  Weise  1987; Kee gan, Spray, 
Harwood, & La vallee  2010).  
 
Motivation can be divided into intrinsic and extrinsic motivation as well as task and 
ego involvement. Individual differences in goal perspective can be measured. There 
are few issues related to sport behavior and goal perspective. These are  effort 
exerted, task choic e, performance and persistence (Duda 2007, 78 -93). Intrinsic 
motivation means a person doing activity for himself and the inner pleasure by 
doing certain activities. Extrinsic motivation means behavior, where a goal of a 
18 
 
certain  activity extends beyond goals of persons’ own activity. There is also third 
type of motivation called amotivation. This construct is important to consider to 
fully understanding human behavior. Person is amotivated when he does not 
perceive contingencies between outcomes and own action. In this case they are not 
motivated either intrinsic or extrinsically, but they become non motivated (Vallerand 
& Perreault 2007, 155 -161).  
 
 Exercise and sporting can be described as ‘desire to act voluntarily into activi ties 
during a free time’. Motivation can be described as ‘an element to let person to do 
the same activity time after time’. Motivation can stay or diminish as time goes by. 
Among children, adults have a big affect to motivation of their children. If paren ts 
can offer positive motivation, children are more likely to keep doing sports. If 
parents are not willing to support sports of their children, their motivation is more 
likely to diminish. Motives on participation in sports can be re -checked after once in  
a while. Participation among young people and adults can vary. Thus, with strong 
motivation it  is easier to do sports (Biddle  2007, 378 - 387).  
  
According to Weinberg and Gould motivation is critical to the success. It is 
important to have ability to mot ivate people. Motivation can be defined as a 
direction and intensity of effort. Sport psychologist can see motivation from several 
ways. These can be for example achievement motivation, motivation in the form of 
competitive stress, as well as intrinsic and  extrinsic motivation. Motivation can be 
divided into two components, direction of effort and intensity of effort. These refer 
to whether an individual seeks out, approaches or is attracted to certain situations 
and how much effort a person puts forth in a  particular situation.  External and 
internal situations are always affecting on motivation either positive or negative 
way. Moreover, personal characteristics are widely affecting on persons motivation 
(Weinberg &  Gould  2007, 51 -53).  
 
Motivation can be divided into three approaches. Motivation can be developed and 
learned by using different strategies. Participant centered view: Officially called as a 
trait-centered view, means motivated behavior being primarily a function of 
individual characteristics. This is also seen by personal needs and motivated 
19 
 
behavior. Opposite to the former is situational -centered orientation. In this case 
motivation level is determined mostly by situation. Situation influences motivation. 
Also, this approach analyzes how motiv ated person survives in a negative 
environment. One way to understand thematic of motivation is to consider both the 
person and the situation –and ho w these two interact. (Weinberg &  Gould 2007, 53 -
54).   
 
There are several methods to build motivation. Th ese are considering both situation 
and trait techniques in motivating people, by analyzing and responding to interaction 
of personal and situational characteristics. Motivation ch anges, thus it is necessary 
to monitor motives of people.  It is important to understand people’s multiple 
motives for involvement. Motives  among athletes can vary, thus examining these 
variables can help a lot to improve and understand motivation. For example motives 
can be based on cultural, monetary or even narcissistic values. I t is important to 
monitor motives by observing. Observing is said to be mo re effective method than 
asking  (Blair  2010).    
 
Thus, it is important to enhance motivation by changing environment.  Influencing 
motivation can be difficult, but it is good to lear n it. Motivation can be either 
realistic or unrealistic and this has direct correlation to results. Strong motivation 
can be described as persons’ efforts to a certain task, achievement excellence, 
overcoming obstacles, to perform better than others and by  taking pride in 
exercising as a talent. Motivation is always part of personal and situational factors 
and resultant tendencies. Also emotional reactions and achievement behavior is 
important (Weinberg &  Gould  2007, 54  -75).  
 
There is great need to unders tand more about motivation. There are certain theories 
to base knowledge on current information about what motivation is. There are major 
roles of parents, coaches and peers among athletes. Significantly, others can affect 
on motivation either positive or negative way. Sport commitment consists of 
enjoyment, involving alternatives, personal investments, social constraints and 
involvement opportunities ( Weiss & Amorose 2008, 116, 123  -128, 147  -155). 
According to Hanin (2007),  emotions are important to under stand especially in elite 
20 
 
level. Thus, it is essential to have performance patterns in sport setting. Hanin states 
that relationship between emotions and motivation can be examined, so their 
interactive effect could be more explained (Hanin 2007, 55 -68).  
 
High motivation is an athlete’s goal after an injury. Without strong motivation, it is 
almost impossible to be able to continue traini ng and to make desired comeback  
(Hamson -Utley  2008). There are several methods to reach a proper level of 
motivation. Th ese methods are relaxing, balancing training, social life and avoiding 
stress factors. There can be virtue characteristics of an athlete, which are preferable 
to maintain. When acknowledged, these virtues can help athletes to reach and 
sustain high motivat ion. These are high self -confidence, sustainability, relentless, 
bravery, managing well disappointments, creativity, ability to relax, ability to calm 
down and good concentration.  
 
Support group is important to an athlete  during rehabilit ation process. An  individual 
athlete can have  his own support group and that can be formed from several groups 
of people. These groups are family, relatives, friends, coach, doctor, physiotherapist, 
sport psychologist or other athletes. An athlete is more motivated when he  is task 
oriented with good self esteem. When an athlete is oriented only to himself, he can 
often be too hard on himself and pushing himself too much. Though, positive of 
former is that he can know his limits better, and what to improve and how much. 
Moti vation is a key element with every aspect of training and competing. Motivation 
also has correlation with injuries. Risk of injury can be too big with wrong 
motivational attitude  (Lydell,  Hildingh,  Mansson,  Marklund  & Grahn  2011).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 
 
4. TREATMENT OF SPOR T INJURIES  
 
Kujala et al. states that in Finland, a total of 54,186 acute sport injuries occurred 
during a five -year period from 1987 to 1991. These numbers were from various 
sports. ( Kujala  et.al.  1995 , 311, 1465). Overuse inju ries, as known as 
cumulative  trauma  disorder does not disable an athlete instantly. Thus, this is not 
considered as acute type of injury  (Steffen et al. 2010).  Medical attention is not so 
important in overuse injuries . Treatment varies from acute injuries and depends on 
what type of overuse it is and how long it has been affected. Overuse injuries can be 
related to other acute injuries (Pinzon  & Larrabee  2006). Rehabilitation process  can 
be divided into four different parts. These are where an athlete is able to walk 
normally, run normally, start training and finally ready to go back to competition. 
Usually rehabilitation begins with pool training as soon as an athlete is able to go to 
water. That depends also from surg ery, type and severity of injury. A coach as well 
as an athlete has to take into consideration biological, neuro -mechanical, metabolic 
and psycho -sociological aspects, before sa fe return to sport (Roi  2010, 2  -3). 
 
Athletes are ideally allowed to return ba ck to sports when they are both physically 
and mentally ready. If they are not, there is a risk for re - injury or possible career 
ending situation.  An a thlete can feel confident when making decision to return back 
to sport (Wiese &  Weise  1987). Come back i s not an easy period of time. Positive 
state of mind is important, in order to avoid and prevent injuries and to prepare an 
athlete to return back to sports (Williams , Hogan, Andersen . 1993, 468 -472). Goal 
setting can help an athlete overcome fears and ne gative feelings. For example, 
imaginary can help an athlete to decrease pain, promote health and improve self 
motivation and adherence. Good psychological skills can decrease recovery time  
(Larmer, Mcnair, Smythe &  Williams  2011).  It is important for an athlete to set and 
reach short and long term milestones. Mental imagery can help an athlete  to have 
positive attitude during long and difficult rehabilitation process. This can help him 
to return  to sport. Mental imagery requ ires prac tice and it can be  useful skill. Also 
relaxation can be helpful to some athletes and it is part o f mental imagery (Hamson - 
Utley  2008, 35  -38). 
 
22 
 
Bauman (2005) has shown that psychological factors can increase potential injury. 
There are also markers that p sychological factors can affect on rehabilitation time. 
With positive attitude, an elite athlete can return to sport faster than with negative set 
of mind. Awareness of increasing pressure of injury affects on athletes’ capability to 
return to sports after  injury. Increasing expectations of performing well may increase 
stress levels of an athlete.  This can affect on athlete’s readiness to return to sport 
and inc rease risk of re -injury (Bauman  2005, 432  -435).  
 
According to Podlog and Eklund (2004), an athl ete might have different kind of 
fears related to returning to sport. Fears can be related to re -injury, performing to 
same level prior an injury, difficulties meeting demands on coach and other athletes.  
Moreover, there can be fears of losing membership of an athletic fraternity and how 
their body withstands d emands of sport.  There are also questions  how to cope with 
three psychological aspects: competency, autonomy and readiness. (Podlog &  
Eklund  2004, 257  -259). Study of Santhosh et al. (2008) shows th at athlete’s 
psychological responses can be often negative, including depression, low self -
esteem and distress. Athletes’ own personality is in great matter of how to react 
towards negative feelings and how to deal with those. Sometimes injuries of an 
athlete can be predicted before it even happens. There can be evidence in training 
that can lead to injury. These can be either related to training too hard, to wrong 
technique or to some other reason. Stressful life -events in athlete’s life can affect to 
possible injury. Social support can help an athlete to gain positive results and 
increase well  being (Santhosh, Rajitha Menon &  Jayan  2008, 151  -155).  
 
When comparing athletes before and after an injury, there are symptoms like 
(greater) mood disturbances, lo wer self -esteem and increased depression. Gladly, 
negative emotional changes diminish during rehabilitation, if done properly. 
Confusion, anger, anxiety and depression and fatigue are diminishing fastest during 
rehabilitation (Johnston, Carroll, 2010, 436 -439). Psychological variables, as 
predictor of injury may occur, thus affecting on athletes psychological response to 
injur y (Mohd Nor  2001, 39  -50; Wiese &  Weise  1987, 318  -330).  
 
23 
 
There are numerous ways to study sport injuries. Reason for an injury can r elated to 
poor equipment, overtraining, poor weather conditions, nature of sport or other 
possible reasons.  Andersen and Williams states a model of stress and athletic 
injuries for both prediction and prevention. This model is based on the stress 
response  and cognitive appraisal and physiological as well as attentional aspects. 
Second part of this model is history of stressors including life events, daily hassles 
and previous injuries. Third bigger part is personality and last is coping resources. 
Interven tion is important in case of avoiding sport i njuries (Andersen &  Williams  
2007, 325  -330).  
 
According to Fisher and Hoisington self -motivation and importance of 
psychological variables during rehabilitation are essential  parameters . Psychological 
skills can be optimal during rehabilitation process. Athletes’ expectations towards a 
trainer, super vision and motivational support have to be set  realistic. Influence of 
athletic trainer is well known and studied on a level of physical rehabilitation, but in 
level of psychological rehabilitation interaction between athlete and a trained could 
be better. An athlete needs more empathy and psychologica l support during 
rehabilitation  (Fisher & Hoisington  1993, 48  -53). 
 
Study of Fisher and Hoisington shows that 75% of  reported athletes demanded 
increased influence of an athletic trainer. Educational phase is important for athletes. 
There is a need for information concerning nature of an injury, issues related to 
recovery process and specific plans during rehabilitation . Rehabilitation is taken 
most often cautiously, thus athletic trainer together with an athlete can do more 
together than alone. Keeping ups self -motivation is mostly based on adherence and 
willpower, thus can be improved by controlling intrinsic motivatio n. Sometimes an 
athlete can undermine their self motivation by regular  monitoring by  athletic trainer. 
Supervision of an athletic trainer promotes greater effort and presence of trainer 
enhances quality of a rehabilitation workout. Positive aspects, encour agement and 
directing attention to positive aspects can help trainer to manage rehabilitation 
process of an athlete for better results. Understanding situation of other teammates 
can be challenging. Some teammates do not realize their important and support ive 
role for an injured athlete. Importance of teammates and an athletic trainer is bigger 
24 
 
than people usually realize. Monitoring progress of rehabilitation is important and 
progress report can be given at regular bases (Fisher &  Hoisington  1993, 48  -53). 
 
Overtraining  can be a problem in some injury cases. Overtraining is a term 
explaining imbalance between an exercise and recovery. 7 -10 days of overtraining 
can lead to various symptoms, for example affecting to immunological, nervous or 
endoc rinological systems (Jaekendrup &  Hesselink 1994, 239  -240).  
 
 
4.1  Rehabilitation  
 
Rehabilitation is necessary after an injury and it has to place as soon as possible. If 
rehabilitation is delayed, it can cause only negative effects.  This can cause 
permanent physica l or mental matters or even a state of not recovering at all from an 
injury. Finding inner motivation is important during rehabilitation process. If there is 
no motivation, rehabilitation process can be difficult. Goals can be clear in mind at 
the beginnin g of rehabilitation. Milestones are keys to keep up motivation. Well 
planned is half done, is an expression that is true in these situations. Diversity of 
rehabilitation techniques can keep up motivation and plans being alive. Other thing 
that help s is pos itive attitude (Saltapidas  & Ponsford.  2007).  Important issue in 
rehabilitation are motivation  to recover, willingness to complete recovery period, 
use proper techniques, be emotionally mature, have high self - confidence and mental 
toughness to make thru h ard times. Communication between an athlete and a trainer 
can be active and open. Understanding each other is important to manage, thus 
succeedi ng rehabilitation (Wiese, Weiss &  Yukelson  1991) . 
 
4.2  Physical rehabilitation  
 
It is crucial to remember to ta ke it slow when an athlete  first get s back into sport and 
gradually build back up to pre -injury level. Physiotherapist with specialized doctor 
in sport medicine can decide what kind of physical rehabilitation is needed. Most 
often this consists of cross tr aining, including stationary cycles, swimming, water 
therapy and rowing machines. Resting is mandatory and a key factor to recover from 
an injury. Medication is often pain medication, but also other medication can be 
25 
 
used depending on a injury type. There are many people from different specialist 
groups. It varies against injury types, what kind of treatment is best for an athlete. 
Rehabilitation as a process is important to acknowledge, thus can create reflections 
later on, when an athlete has returned to his sport. Physical recovery outcome can 
include also emotional and behavioral aspects. There cannot be physical 
rehabilitation without psychological treatment as well. With physical treatment it is 
good to have at least stress management, goal setting and  relaxation with imagery to 
get broad rehabilitation (Udry &  Andersen  2008, 402  -422).  
 
Goal for an injured athlete is to safely return back to sports. It is not easy to return 
back to pre -injury level, thus reaching to pre -injury goals can be frustrating  process. 
Staying on right path can be challenging t o reach reliable goals  (Podlog &  Eklund  
2009, 535  -544). Without pro per physical therapy, continuation of an athlete  career 
might be difficult. Physiotherapy can improve athletes’ motivation, behavioural and 
emotional responses as well as physical responses. Physical skills will help an 
athlete to cope all emotions and feelings (Hamson - Utley et.al. 2008, 258  -264). 
 
Treatment is often physical rehabilitation, but sometimes psychological treatment  
has been  forgotten mostly or significantly. It is important to treat mind of an athlete 
by combining it into physical rehabilitation. If the mind and psychological part is not 
treated properly, it can lead to finishing career because of physiological reasons. A 
sport injury is almost as important from psychological point of view as it is from 
physiological side. Treatments are decided by an injury type and it  can be further 
divided as acute or chronic. Some examples of treatment methods are RICER and 
TOATAPS method s, meaning ( R – Rest; I – Ice; C – Compression; E – Elevation 
and R – Referral) and (T – Talk; O – Observe; T – Touch; A - Active movement; P - 
Passive movement and S - Skills test). Among medical personnel, most often doctor 
is the person who decides what  treatment method is used. Often X -rays and 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are needed to determine the extent of any injury. 
MRI allows doctors to see soft tissues more clearly than X -rays or CT scans do. Pain 
relief and anti -inflammatory medicines such as ibuprofen are used after every injury. 
Splints, casts, and surgery also may be needed, depending on the injury  (Mero et al. 
1997, 251  -253;  Quinn 2010; Tse  & Chan 1987).  
26 
 
 
Physical as well as psychological symptoms can occur and these are almost 
impossi ble to differ. What can be done to help an athlete to survive with an injury? 
Social support, physical stressors like fear of re -injury and other physical limitations 
can be taken into consideration  (Masie ro, Armani &  Rosati 2011).  Social stressors 
can iso late an athlete from his friends. Teammates can create a pressure to come 
back to sport too soon. Also a coach can give negative feedback to an athlete. An 
athlete can receive  individual training from a coach . This will give  an athlete time to 
prepare for comeback.  An athlete can be involved as much  as he is willing to do 
(Podlog &  Eklund  2007, 207  -225).  
 
 
4.3 Psychological rehabilitation  
 
Psychological rehabilitation is meaning for setting realistic performance goals, 
rebuilding confidence for competition s, overcoming possible fears of re -injury, 
preventing isolated from the team and providing reassurance for successful returning 
to sports. Athletes cannot overcome psychological barriers alone, thus profession al 
assistance is needed (Podlog & Dionigi  2010) . Athletic trainers’ opinion is that in a 
rehabilitation program, many psychological skills and strategies are important. 
Trainers’ position is to encourage an athlete to have positive and realistic thinking 
about injury and motivate rehabilitate injury. R easons for rehabilitation can be clear 
to an athlete. Also feelings about returning to sport can be understood. Sport 
psychologist and other members of team leaders are in a key position to assist an 
athlete towards better psychological skills to hand le rehabilitation (Wiese, Weiss &  
Yukelson  1991).  
 
During the psychological rehabilitation, adjustment can be helped or hindered by the 
injured athlete’s own personality. Pessimistic or optimistic attitude of an athlete 
during a rehabilitation process can have  big effects on desired results. Instead of 
feeling bad and denying everything, it is important to do goal -setting and self -talk. 
These are two of the most important in the psychological rehabilitation process. 
Depending on an injury, tailored rehabilitati on program and other methods can cause 
an athlete to achieve faster healing times and process (Crust  2007 ). 
27 
 
 
One of the main goals of psychological rehabilitation is to have a sport psychologist 
to help prevention of re -injury. There is a need for the spor t psychologist who takes 
personal responsibility for athlete’s recovery process. An athlete needs high 
motivation, desire and determination . This can be also healthcare personnel who are 
working with an athlete. Social support is important during rehabilit ation  process 
and it can be more detailed during rehabilitation, than before the injury. Maintaining 
a positive attitude is important after injury and without support person, it can be 
different to achieve. Mental training for dealing with an injury, as we ll as visualizing 
what has happened and what can happen next, are important factors in a case of 
recovering mentally from an injury. Pain control is an issue that can be solved at 
some point with imagery and mental training. Imagination of feeling with no pain 
can be used with some people. Spiritual training can be useful to some athletes. 
Relaxing and stiffing muscles is one method to psychologically deal with pain and 
mental issues concerning injuries ( Porter &  Foster 1986,  81 -90). 
 
According to Clement & Shannon (2011) social support helps harmful effects on 
psychological feelings and issues caused by sport injury. As a definition, social 
support means “an exchange of resources between two individuals, perceived by the 
provider to enhance the wellbeing o f the recipient”. In world of sport, sport injuries 
are often unavoidable and cause negative reactions to athletes. These negative 
feelings can cause more harm to an athlete and can make rehabilitation more 
difficult. Social support has strong relationship  between stress and mental wellbeing. 
Social support can be given with several ways. These are listening, emotional 
support, reality -confirmation and task -appreciation support. Easiest of these to offer 
is listening. Social support can be given by coach, d octor, physiotherapist, 
teammates or othe r friends (Clement, & Shannon 2011).  
 
According to s tudy of Laats (2011), through the rehabilitation process athlete 
expressed strong athletic identity and for each participant going after an injury was 
considered a  normal part of the spor t  (Laats  2011) . Social support is alongside 
stress and coping, one of the most important construct in health psychology. An 
athlete respond to an injury varies psychologically. Role of social support is crucial 
28 
 
during recovery proc ess. Personal experiences affects on how an athlete  accept 
social support. Most often injury is seen as stressful situation and psychologically it 
affects on athletes’ abilities to handle it. Any social support is ben eficial (Maddison 
& Prapavessis  2005). Though, it is necessary to differentiate between different kind 
of support that is available. All support won´t suit to all athletes. Social support can 
be seen as a multidimensional perspective, meaning structural and functional. Social 
support helps an a thlete to cope with different kind of injur y-related stressors 
(Mitchell 2011). According to research of Hardy et al, social support is in a major 
role of handling issues like crisis, stress and other mental and physical situations. 
Social support is usefu l in different situations during a l ife (Hardy, Richman & 
Rosenfeld  1991).  
 
In case  an athlete has positive expectation towards returning to sport, risk of re -
injury is less than if an athlete has anxiety, stress and negative expectations. An 
injury durat ion has also little bit affect on result, but more si gnificant was mood 
disturbances ( Albinson  & Petrie  2003). Athletes with  several life stressors are in 
greater risk of having an injury or re -injury after recovering. This can be taken care 
by removing so urces of stressors or by learning to deal and accept the sources. Life 
satisfaction is important especially in a social environment. Stress diminishes life 
satisfaction, especially with major injury but less wit h minor injuries (Malinauskas  
2010).  
 
Psychol ogical rehabilitation can be difficult to cope after an injury.  It takes time to 
recover when there are no physical signs. It is sometimes difficult to rest and take 
time off from a sport. This is especially true, when an athlete is experiencing a good 
season with results. Emotionally it can be hard. These emotions can lead to finishing 
career, if these emotions are not dealt properly. There can be denying, accusing and 
several other emotions related to injury and process of rehabilitation after wards.  It 
is important that an  athlete has a lot of support during this difficult time period.  An 
athlete may need a professional help to feelings that he is going thru. Athletes will 
act differently for health care professionals, thus is it important to know how t o treat 
people.  
 
29 
 
Psychological issues during rehabilitation process of treating injuries are important 
for everyone. That is why this period of time can be said as crisis.  Besides stress, 
psychological factors related to injuries are potential of creatin g stressful athletic 
situation. For example poor performance can lead to injury, depending on how 
threatening situation is. State anxiety is also one of the key elements related to 
injury. An a thlete who has better psychological skills is more likely to av oid or 
rehabilitate faster from injuries. Good skills are goal setting, imagery and relaxation. 
Personal factor are in great part. These are for example self -concept, introversion - 
extroversion  and tough -mindedness (Weinberg &  Gould  2007, 448  -452).  
 
Psych ological factors that are good with every sport are self esteem, long -spanning, 
relentless, brave, tolerance of disappointment. Also it is important to be creative, 
being able to relax, being able to calm down and being able to concentrate. These 
skills ar e important and necessary to win competitions without injuries ( Mero  et al. 
2007, 227 -239).  A performance anxiety can happen often after an injury and during 
an athlete is coming back to his sport for the first time. There are many factors that 
can cause anxiety like home, family, friends , own experiences and expectations and 
afraid of injury. Moreover, other people and groups can cause anxiety and media, 
fans, publicity, financial supporters, sponsors and own financial issues.  Rest of 
these factors can b e organizations like Olympic committee, rules, coach, team, other 
personnel or important game ( Eriksson et al.  1987, 283).  Positive thinking during 
rehabilitation process is a key element to recover. Most often coach is the first 
person who is dealing iss ues about an athlete.  Psychologically role of a coach is to 
deal with psychological concerns with an athlete . Sometimes a coach is not well 
educated for psychological issues, thus it can be advisable to have psychological 
support from professionals (Podlo g & Dionigi  2010).  
 
Severity of an injury is closely related to amount of psychological distress. 
Psychological responses can be either cognitive or emotional. Injuries can be 
handled as a loss of health and by learning previous experiences from other athl etes. 
These reactions are denial, anger, bargaining, depression and acceptance. Athletes’ 
recovery process includes three different stages. These are distress, denial and 
determined coping. Examples of these can be anger, shock, isolation, quilt, or 
30 
 
helple ssness. Alternatively responses can be cognitive, emotional or behavioural. 
There is different kind of models concerning behaviours during an injury response, 
but most used model is injury response. That is made by Wiese - Bjornstal, Smith, 
Shaffer and Morr ey’s during 1998. That model includes pre injury factors, actual 
time of sport injury, recovery outcomes, behavioural and emotional response. This 
model also includes personal and situational factors. Thus, it is important to notice 
that relatively little attention has been given to surroundings with injury 
rehabilitation process and theory between that ( Udry &  Andersen  2008, 410 -419).  
 
One way to reduce risk of injury is to acknowledge psychological factors associated 
with injuries. According to study of Podlog, Lochbaum & Stevens (2010) 
psychological wellbeing includes positive and negative self -esteem as well as 
vitality. Basic needs of psychological wellbeing are competence, autonomy and 
relatedness.  (Podlog, Lochbaum & Stevens  2010 , 167  -182). These i ssues can affect 
to ath letes` return to sport s after an injury.  
 
4.4 Prevention of sport  injuries  
 
Some major issues to improve healthy life style are good inheritance, family 
relationships, proper and realistic se lf- image, body image and suitable  diet. Positive 
attitude is the most important key element to control feelings and increase positive 
feelings. Healthy diet is major element for an athlete to prevent sport injuries. Old 
traditions can hamper these efforts, like food cannot be wasted or everythin g on the 
plate has to be eaten. Poor eating habits can lead to illnesses and further  lead to 
injuries ( Mero, Nummela, Keskinen & Häkkinen. 2007, 145  -210).  
 
In injury prevention, it is important to think safety issues and try to protect and avoid 
possible  injuries. Unintended consequences of the countermeasures are most 
effective, when combined with trade -offs that go hand -in-hand with implementation 
of a safety program and a culture  (William, S ands, McNeal, Jemni & Penitent  2011). 
According to Finch, Ulla h & Mc Intosh, in a future there will  be at least 
consideration about global injury mechanism. Each possible injury mechan ism will  
be exposed to closer consideration. These accidents are for example falling, head 
31 
 
impact or frictions. Individual (intrinsic) risk factors are considered by selecting 
controls (matching) or analyzing (age, sex, skill level, anatomical or physical factors 
and fit ness) (Finch, Ullah, & Mclntosh  2011).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32 
 
5. PURPOSE OF THE STUDY  
 
The aim  was to study experiences of elite swimmers during recovery process. Secondly, this 
study helped to describe and understand possible career ending factors after an injury among 
young elite swimmers.  Thus, the current study aimed to describe in detail:  
 
1. Participants´ perceptions on injuries  and rehabilitation process  
2.  Deficit factors  of motivation during rehabilitation process  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33 
 
6. METHODS  
 
Semi structured thematic interview was used as conducting this study. After 
familiarizing to subject and background of this topic , local swimming club was 
contacted to recruit participants. Five swimmers tool part of this study, three males 
and two females. They had suffered from one or several injuries and gone through a 
rehabilitation process. Two swimmers were still competing and  three were active in 
other sports than swimming.  
 
Athletes were contacted and given consent form to fill  in. All participants were 
informed about the purpose and the method of the study. They were informed that 
participation in the study was voluntary. T hey could refuse to participate or 
withdraw from the study at any time without any repercussions. The participants 
were reassured that their responses would be treated confidentially. Their identities 
would not be revealed in the reporting of the findings.  One athlete was younger than 
18, so his parents were also contacted and permission asked. Other athletes were 18 -
22 year old. Based on gender, there were three males and two females.  
 
There were five different themes in the interviews all related with in juries or 
rehabilitation process, common to swimming. Interviews were held during one week 
at the cafeteria of swimming pool or at library of Jyväskylä University. Each 
interview took about 40 minutes. Afterwards interviews were transcribed verbatim. 
The m aterial was collected by the researcher. The data analysis was performed in a 
different step:  
- The verbatim transcription of each interview wa s read several times to 
provide  broader view of the interviews.  
- Main points from interviews was formed into bigger  sections  
- Themes and sub -themes were created (table 1).  
 
 
 
 
 
34 
 
Table 1. Overview of the sub -themes, themes and core theme:   
Subthemes  Themes  Core theme  
Amount of training  
Success  
Athlete -coach -team 
relationship  Career before injury  
 
Goals and milestones  Achievements  
First reactions after a n 
injury  
Immediate response from 
teammates and a coach  
 Immediate : 
 psychological changes  
 
 
Delayed:  
Reasons for injury  
 Reactions to i njury  
Treating only physical 
injuries  
Lack of psychological 
support  
Hope to reach pr evious 
goals  
A tailored rehabilitation: a 
physical solitary  
Keeping up motivation, 
psychological solitary  Resources of rehabilitation  
Lack of presence of Sport 
Psychologist  
 
 
 Rehabilitation  
Lack of hope to reach 
personal settled goals and 
milestones  
Role  of a coach as a 
gatekeeper to a team  
A coach: letting quit too 
easily  Quitting or continuing a athlete 
career  
Austerity policy  
 
Lack of presence of  Coach  Motivation  
 
 
 
 
35 
 
7. RESULTS  
 
Five elite swimmers were questioned  by theme interview method. Three swimm ers 
started swimming at the age of five years. Others started at the age of two and seven 
years old. Some took swimming classes and some just swam with friends and 
families. All athletes had hobbies, before and after their swimming career. Most 
popular hob by was gymnastics. Other activities were basketball, gym, jogging, 
figure skating and floor hockey. Other non exercise activities were playing guitar 
and handcrafts . Before injuries, all athletes had goals to get better times and most 
swimmers had wanted t o get medals and even records. Also some had goals to get 
into relay crew.   All participants  were elite swimmers. Most swimmers had several 
medals from Finnish Championships. There were several gold, silver and bronze 
medals as well as placements for nati onal team. Some athletes had medals from 
relay. Two athletes were still competing and reaching for medal positi ons. Three 
swimmers were  not competing, but doing something else in relationship with sports.  
 
All swimmers had at least mild shoulder injury, t hree participants had this as a major 
injury as an accident and two had overuse injury in their shoulders. Two swimmers 
had ba ck injuries  due to accident s. One swimmer had also knee injury. Three 
swimmers needed at least one surgical operation during rehab ilitation. Other two 
swimmers needed nonsurgical rehabilitation. Reasons for injuries varied. Injuries in 
this study were caused in most cases by overuse of limb and wrong technique. In 
interviewing participants, shoulder injury was either congenital or fr om accident or 
overuse. Other injury types were knee or back. Three athletes had more than one 
injury. In three cases injuries occurred same time and in one case two injuries occurs 
separately. Surgical o peration was needed for 3 swimmers.  
 
Most of the  injured athletes  felt themselves as strangers in his or her  team. They 
experienced like they were  outsiders. For example injured athletes were given 
different, easier training programs. This lead into situation , where other members of 
the team saw them as  skipper s, because they did less than the others.  Direct quotings  
are marked with “ Participant 1 - 5”. (P1) “All other teammates were jealous to me, 
because I was doing different training.  They thought that I want to skip training 
36 
 
because I didn’t want to trai n. I wanted to practice as they do but I just couldn’t”.  
They looked at me like a Study of Pensgaard & Roberts (2002) mentions, that in 
competitive world, an athlete who is not able to meet expectations and focus on 
good results might lose identity or expe rience being left alone and stressed. This 
may lead to short o r long term affects. (Pensgaard & Roberts 2002,  54 -59). 
 
Body of a pubertal athlete is growing fast; consequently it creates challenges to 
coaches. Results from this thematic interview are lead ing into conclusion, that 
bodies of young elite swimmers are especially prone to shoulder problems. Exercise 
programs may  give too much load for the young person´s  growing body. P2 “My 
shoulders were not ready to as much training as we had. We had too much  training 
just before my injury. Training made my injury worse”. On the psychological side, 
the injured athlete can act offensively and impulsively against a coach. Generally, 
pubertal athletes are experiencing strong feelings and thus, a young athlete may  feel 
that only way to solve a problem is to make a scene: this imprudent acting may lead 
to unnecessary quitting for an athlete career. The theme interview reveals feelings of 
young swimmers, that coaches are taking swimming too seriously. This had negati ve 
effect for the motivation of the pubertal athlete.   
 
Rehabilitation process had varied, based on injury type.  Physiotherapist took part in 
every participant and four of five swimmers had contact with other professionals 
like physician. Follow up of phy siotherapist was combined with recess from 
swimming. During this recess the athletes had easier training sessions outside 
swimming pool with weights or aerobic. Some swimmers had easier swimming 
training. Time of the break depended on level and type of inj ury. Two of the 
participants had a contact with physiotherapist several times per week; other two had 
once a week and a one less than that.  P3” It was good to have medical personnel, 
especially physiotherapist who is always available. I want to get answers  if I have 
questions concerning my injury. It would be good to have more contacts with doctor 
and motivational coach”.  Frequent contact s with physiotherapists are  also presented 
in study of Ninedek & Kolt.  Physiotherapists are working closely with the ath letes 
during rehabilitation process, so their role is important. Physiotherapist is able to 
37 
 
give some psychological help to an athlete, if sport psychologist i s not available 
(Ninedek & Kolt  2000,  191-206).  
 
Every interview showed that social support was i mportant during and after injury. 
Support group  is important for an injured athlete. All athletes in this study had 
physiotherapist all the time during their rehabilitation. Majority of athletes had 
doctor’s appointments during their rehabilitation process . Physiotherapist took part 
actively in three cases. Team members and friends as well as other support groups 
are in key element after injury. Results of this study presents, that without mental 
support, recovery of the injured athlete might not be as effe ctively as with those 
cases, when the athlete has strong support group. According to study of Laats (2011) 
Support and connectedness to the other players, participants in her study talked 
about family relations during the time of their injury . Members of t he team were 
present  to support injured athlete during a rehabilitation process. Athletes recalled 
negative emotions, when they were not able to train with the team. Participants 
perceived important and described in detail the feeling of connectedness they  had 
with the team and family during the time of their injury.  Results in study of Laats 
shows that, additionally, relationship with their physiotherapist during the injury 
rehabilitation was described by the participants as close, trustworthy, secure and  
supportive.  (Laats  2011)  
 
Rehabilitation process was long and the athletes were not able to manage without 
social con tacts. These contacts were team mates, athletes with other or current injury 
and other friends. This is also proven b y other researches. “Social support helps 
injured athletes diminish their uncertainty by providing them with a sense of control 
over their situation” (Albrecht & Adelman, 1987, as cited in Robbins & Rosenfeld 
2001,  280). Another citation from same source proves that it is impor tant to fulfill 
roles of social support during whole rehabilitation process. It does not matter who 
and how experienced a support person is in case of injury. It is important to have 
someone to talk to.  “Who takes on that role and who would be more s ucces sful in 
that role. This is important but unanswered question ” (Robbins & Rosenfeld 2001,  
280).  P3” I felt that without my friends and teammates I couldn’t be at this positions 
now. I had lot of support during my rehabilitation process and that helped me t hru 
38 
 
hard times”. P4 “ I needed support but I felt so lonely during my rehabilitation and 
that might be one of those reasons why I had to end my career after injury”.  
 
Reaction of the coach  to the injured athlete and rehabilitation process was in the key 
element when thinking about continuing career after in jury. Some swimmers didn´t 
have enough help  from the coach while losing motivation. Some athletes cut out 
from swimming team too early, because when they said to the coach they wanted to 
quit swimming, co ach simply agreed .  This happened without thinking the issue 
deeper  at all. Some coaches had limited access to knowing what is going on with the 
participant. Reason for this can be that the athlete may have two coaches the same 
time or he has just changed the training group.  
 
Volatile athlete -coach relationship  is important. P5” My relationship with my coach 
was bad. We didn´t get along and I felt that my coach didn´t like me at some level 
and that effected on his coaching style. He didn´t want to coach me ”. P2 “I had 
wonderful coach who called me once a week during my rehabilitation process and 
made sure that I was feeling god and if I needed help. She made sure that I had 
everything I needed”. An injury affects seriously to coach -athlete relationship, eve n 
if their  alliance have been good before injury. Feeling as an outsider can be 
increased by arguments with the coach. These arguments diminish athlete’s 
motivation and fellowship with the team. An Injury caused feelings of frustration to 
the athletes. The  athlete could blame coach for his injury, or he didn’t want to tell 
about the pain to coach, due to fear of negative reactions. The athletes felt that coach 
was focusing only to healthy athletes. The athlete might felt  this as discrimination, 
thus this wa s weakening his motivation towards swimming. A risk for vortex of 
negative emotions was imminent. This study presents, that negativity will lead to a 
loss of motivation and to early quitting s.  
 
Use of sport psychologist  is needed during rehabilitation pro cess. The a thletes could 
combine sport psychologist with their trainer few times per week. It can be useful to 
have sport psychologist or a motivation trainer, as swimmers call it. He can work 
together with trainer and they both could focus for their field s of expertise.  If an 
athlete has problems  with a low motivation, he could  talk to sport psychologist 
39 
 
instead of trainer or coach. By addressing this problem with specialized expert, an 
injured athlete could get support for keeping up motivation. Otherwise , he might be 
forced to keep up his motivation alone.  This can increase envy and other negative 
feelings among other athletes in a team. Other team members cannot understand 
why injured athlete does not have to work out as intensively as they are doing. By  
these reasons, an athlete can be given an opportunity to see sport psychologist. This 
approach is preventing acute conflicts in coach -athlete relationship, which could 
otherwise lead to early quitting of careers with pubertal athletes. Psychological 
wellb eing is essential in case old injured young athlete. P5 “If there would be either 
sport psychologist or some kind of motivational coach, I think I would be still 
competing”. P3 “Motivational coach would be a great help once a week during our 
practices and more if needed”.  
 
In four out of five interviews was clear that athletes had wish for sport psychologist 
as part of their team.  Sport psychologist or mental coach is welcome to team.   At 
the moment it seems that coaches are not updated what happens in the ir teams. This 
is at least among injured athletes.  There is too much training for young swimmers 
who are growing up. There seems to be lot of changes in different teams and groups. 
This alters concentration of swimmers to their goals and trainings. Too lo ng break 
can lead to losing motivation on rehabilitation. Sport psychologist has knowledge 
base, on reflecting psychological principles in working  with athlete  (Wiese, Weiss &  
Yukelson  1991) . 
 
Results from all five interviews show how important motivation is and there are 
feelings towards better communication between team members and coach . 
P1“Motivation is everything. After my injury I felt that I lost everything and it took 
long time to get that motivation back. I felt that I could have been physically re ady 
to return earlier but I didn´t have that mental desire to come back and compete”. An 
injury is a mental as well as a physical trauma and this accident can be treated 
respectfully. Even though sport injuries are common, psychological side of injuries 
is not well reported. With positive attitude, goal setting, proper coping skills, 
intrinsic motivation and psychological assistance, recovering from sport injuries can 
be easier. It is necessary, that all goals can be set realistic. Being involved with the 
40 
 
team during r ehabilitation is important. An a thlete can be willing to do his best and 
learn to recover during a rehabilitation process. Understanding setbacks and stress 
during rehabilitation is necessary. Recovering from an injury is not an easy process. 
Relaxation, listening and controlling emotions is valuable knowledge. Imagery can 
be used in some cases. Sport psychologist is with proper psychological skills to deal 
with injured athletes and process of recovering. Coach and physiotherapist can do 
somethi ng, but they often don´t have enough  training and  skills (Wiese et al. 1991; 
15 -24). Treating injuries cannot be overlooked, as it  is in case of smaller injuries  
(Ristolainen  2012).  
 
Injuries are often called as a crisis and can cause stress, panic, fear , and other 
emotional mental crisis. Body and mind is combined and sport psychologist is the 
best person to treat those. Psychological concerns can cause frustration, tension, 
anxiety or panic and rehabilitation prolong without proper treatment. When feel ings 
are stable and athlete is a ble to accept his situation, recovery might be easier. An 
athlete can be able to turn recovery  to new opportunity in his career  (Lynch  1988, 
161 -167).  
 
The injured athlete might feel   inferiority  and weakened motivation. This could 
occur,  even if he or she had will of power to train with other group. Interviews 
suggest that all coaches were not interested, or either they had no resources to take 
care about in jured athletes. Some athletes felt themselves lonely and as outsiders 
after the injury. This was immediate result for a lack of support. Some athletes felt 
good, when they had a friend who had injuries at the same time. This peer support 
from another swimm er was positive effect and made recovery faster and easier in 
two cases. Most commonly, injured athletes felt they were isolated from their team. 
Some injured athletes suggested, that other teammates  may be so competitive, that 
they did not want to help th ese injured athletes.   
 
41 
 
8. DISCUSSION  
 
Injuries and overtraining have connection  between motivation and quitting of career. 
Thus, it is important to acknowledge physical aspects in this study. Interviewed 
athletes felt that they had to train too much . Also they thought that they wer e too 
early age when  their coach  added more training.  Two of the participants’  had growth 
impairments, because of the excess ive amount of training during a  growing age. 
According to this study shoulders were especially prone to ma lformation with young 
elite swimmers. Reaction to an injury  varies a lot, based on athlete’s personality. An 
athlete can experience different psychological consequences from sport injuries. 
(Podlok & Eklund . 2004)  States , that  practitioner can help an athlete becoming 
stronger  to deal with problems and adversity . Study of Raglin et al presents in their 
study of 13 -18 year  old swimmers that swimmers  easily overstrain . Overtraining  is 
result of too much physical and mental training without enough recovery. Mo od 
disturbances and even burn out can be result of overtraining. Also injury can be 
caused by overtraining (Raglin et al. 2000 , 61 -70). According to study of Goss 
(1994) it  is difficult to determine proper amount of training. One way is to see 
training li mit, when an athlete has symptoms of overtraining. Overtraining is said to 
be imbalanc e between recovery and training  (Goss  1994)  
 
Physiotherapists  are often first and only source of help after an injury  (Barefield & 
McCallis ter and Brewer, 1997, 333 -338).  . This is also one of the results from this 
study. Athletes can  have psychological rehabilitation combined to psychological 
rehabilitation (Barefield & McCallister, 1997, 333  -338; Brewer  2010, 233, 241). 
According to Cupal (1998) psychological rehabili tation gives better results and 
affects on mood enhancement, stress, anxiety and  decreasing pain (Cupal  1998, 103  
-123).  According to study of Lee (2011), F innish athletes reported the highest 
expectations for directiveness and genuineness from the physiot herapist, and high 
expectations for physiotherapy outcomes. Compared with h igh expectations for such 
items can be seen to indicate athletes’ expectations for accurate informational 
support and exp ertise from the physiotherapist (Lee 2011).  
 
 
42 
 
Psychological responses  to injuries can  be taken into closer consideration. 
Physiotherapists need more psychological assistance with injured athletes. 
Researchers have seen the value of physiotherapists , being able to deliver sport 
psychology services , when a sport psyc hology consultant is  unavailable (Clement & 
Shannon  2009, 504  -522). If this is not possible in every case, physiotherapists can 
have more holistic approach with taste of psychological components during 
rehabilitation process  (Scherzer  2004 , as cited in Cl ement & Shannon 2009, 505). In 
a future there can be more sport psychologist working in a team –making  sure that 
an athlete is psychologically and physically well.  
 
Based on results from this  study , an injured athlete expect s psychological support 
and moti vational support  from a  coach. Coaches must be advised to be very careful 
with their statements, when a young athlete is bringing quitting his or her career into 
a discussion. This decision cannot happen unguarded and w ithout a severe 
discussion of a  young  athlete and  his or her  support group. Study of Podlog &  
Eklund  states that coach has to deal with athlete returning to sport after injury. An 
athlete might have physical stressors, including for example fear of re -injury and 
fitness concerns. Social stres sors can be for example social isolation from other team 
members and pressure of returning to sports as full team member. Performance 
stressors can be falling behind others and not regaining to pre -injury level. How to 
solve this issue? The study gives ide as to have individual training sessions, keeping 
involved in sports and providing social support (Podlog  & Eklund 2007)  
 
Athlete might face pressure when coming back after injury. He might have issues 
dealing with fear, lo w self -esteem, and loss of identit y or feeling as outsider in his 
team. Psychological wellbeing is equally important as physiological wellbeing. 
Returning to sports after an injury is important transition for an athlete. An a thlete is 
either ready or not.  Support is necessary from team mate s, coach, and other parties, 
dealing with athl ete (Podlog, Lochbaum & Stevens  2010, 167  -182).  
In the future, goals of injured  athlete can be different or same before the injury. 
Among those athletes who are still swimming, goals have changed quite a lot a fter 
the injury and rehabilitation. Two swimmers are still competing and their goals are 
to reach to medal positions and into athlete success. Though,  reaching to pre injury 
43 
 
level is very important goal. Some athletes who have finished their swimming caree r 
have goals  to stay fit and continue new career.  
 
Training groups  can be same all the way through  career. If groups are separated as 
they do now, swimmers have to change a coach. For the coach, there are new 
athletes to practise with. Motivation keeps up  if athletes are familiar with each other 
and they can support each others. Thus, change of training groups and coaches can 
create negative stress factors to an athlete. More can be done to maintain high 
motivation with levels of their skills and abilities . When  a swimmer has high skills 
and abilities, he or she might be able to avoid injuries better than when not proper 
skills. It is important to avoid training too hard when swimmers are growing up.  
Injury can cause results to stay at same level. This can lead to losing motivation and 
ending career. This can be ended by any possible ways. An athlete can feel as an 
outsider, because  other team members are training full pace and an injured athlete is 
not. An injured athlete needs help from his or her team mem bers.  
 
Athletes felt that they were  working alone, without enough support. Support  is very 
important during recovery period. If an athlete  is alone, recovery might be more 
challenging and takes longer period of time, than when an athlete  is able to share his 
feelings to someone. Support group can be from team members. An athlete can 
come back to sport after an injury when he or she is ready to do that. Only an athlete  
knows when he is ready to face training sessions and competitions. This is also 
stated in  article of Bauman (2005)  “it is paramount to assist the athlete in returning to 
competition in the healthiest playing condition and in the  fastest time possible” 
(Bauman  2005, 432).  
 
According to study of Podlog  & Eklund  Positive attitude helps to gain in trinsic 
motivation  and returning to sport. Other people are in great position to help  an 
injured athlete. Expectations  from an athlete himself and other might be either same 
or different. If these are different, an athlete might feel extra pressure. Decrea sed 
confid ence can be  turned into positive attitude,  with a help from social support 
group. Internal motivation is better and stronger tha n external motivation (Podlog  & 
44 
 
Eklund  2005, 20  -34). Social support is needed to maintain motivation to continue 
sports after recovering from injury.  
 
Based on r esults from theme interviews of this study, motivation  is the key element . 
Lack of hope can lead to anxiety to reach personal settled goals and milestones. One 
major finding for the theme interview was similar fo r all interviewees: if results of 
young swimmer are stuck on to a certain level, there is a systematic loss of 
motivation. This loss of motivation and anxiety for not -improving their results are 
major factor for quitting an athlete career. When comparing f inding s of this study  to 
an example of 4 00 meters runner Kirsi Mykkänen, winner of four times 400 meters 
national championship,  one may ask, how much potential we are wasting  on other 
field of sports ? Mykkänen did a couple of years break between transition s from 
young athl etes to adults, d ue to  overtraining and loss of motivation.  Mykkänen’s 
career is a testimony, that young elite athlete’ career is not always finished, even 
after a few years of break.  Like Mykkänen, young elite athlete s can come back with  
higher motivation and bette r physical and mental condition after a break.  This 
shows that career is not always finished if an athlete has a break of few years. 
Mykkänen made a  comeback with higher motivation and better physical and mental 
condition.   She won several national championships after her return to sports.  Lack 
of motivational skills in a team may lead to early quitting. There is a clear indication 
for the theme inter view, that traditional coach had  let some athletes to quit their 
careers too ea sily.  
 
According to this study, injury of one athlete may lead to several quittings  by other 
swimmers. If an injured athlete is an opinion leader and good friend of others, his 
career termination can affect on others –who might  do the same. This can be se en in 
interviews, when two good friends ended their career within 3 months.  According to 
doctoral thesis of Ristolainen (2012) athletes return to sports too soon after an 
injury. Also rehabilitation and supportive training  is forgotten.  In study of 
Ristol ainen (2012) and Ristolainen, Kettunen, Kujala & Heinonen (2011) there are 
intrinsic and extrinsic factors in injury occurrence. Often acute injuries in swimming 
happens somewhere else than in actually swimming. Overuse injuries occur in 
swimming pool. Swimmers  had most injuries in shoulder region and secondly acute 
45 
 
injuries in back. This is due there are more than million  strokes annually with each 
arm Ristolainen (2012).  Incorrect biomechanics, errors  of technique and repetitive 
movements can cause micro trauma to structures in shoulder region. Women 
terminate career  more often than men. Swimming has great number of movements 
without ground impact.  Out of all 432 injuries, 32% were among swimmers. 
Freestyle caused most often injuries. Among swimmers there  are 32% injuries and 
51% overuse injuries. There are more acute injuries among men than women. 
Among overused injuries women have more injuries than men. There is probability 
of 42%, that swimmers terminate their career more than in other sports. (Ristola inen, 
2012; Ristolainen, Kettunen, Kujala & Heinonen 2011).    
 
Role of a coach  is important and especially challenging in Finland, where swimming 
teams have fairly limited budgeting and human resources. Thus , multidisciplinary  
role of coach is challenging . Training of swimming is diverse. A coach  can be team 
manager, regular coach , support person as well as sport psychologist or even act as a  
physiotherapist to  an injured athlete. A coach must  treat athletes equally.  Results 
shows that coaches cannot alway s give resources or time need ed for  an injured  
athlete.  A coach might not have enough time for  communica tion, in order to keep 
up motivation of athletes . Thus,  a coach needs more skills and methods  to be able to 
motivate athletes. A coach can face overwhe lming tasks, thus needing  more  human  
resources  for assisting . A coach is a link between  an athlete and family members and 
support group.  A coach has to take care of interest group and family members. A 
coach acts as a gatekeeper sharing limited number of r esources: who can join 
national team and who can´t. Decision making can be difficult and needs 
information from different perspective. Only little is known about coaching 
perspectives on returning to sports after an injury and how to help an athlete with 
returning phase. Role of a coach can be developed and taken into close consideration 
(Podlog  & Eklund 2007)  
 
According this study four of five swimmers felt less motivated after the injury and 
during the rehabilitation. Rehabilitation period is critical tim e for an athlete. If there 
is temporary loss of motivation, an athlete can face the decision to continue or either 
finish his career. A coach is in a key role deciding what to do with athlete’s future. 
46 
 
Challenge is how to keep swimmers motivated and enjoy their field of sport. Lack of 
previous qualities can lead to career ending situation, where an athlete has lost 
temporarily his motivation. All this is due to lack of recourses: a coach has an 
overwhelming work to keep up all his multidis ciplinary roles. R esult of this is, that a 
coach and an athlete can do career ending decision too easily, especially in case of 
injured and temporarily less motivated athlete. It is important to understand, that 
pressure of other family members and interest group can affect  on decision of an 
injured athlete and a coach. A coach can feel relief due to career ending, because an 
injured athlete causes extra work to him, especially if he is not experienced to handle 
that. This extra work can  be left to professionals, like sport psychologist. This 
challenging, multidis ciplinary role of a coach can be divided:  a coach takes care of 
athletes’ physical needs and skills and a sport psychologist for mental coaching. 
Sport psychologist can act as a link and a catalyst between a coach a nd an athlete.  
 
Article of Podlog & Dionigi explains important role of a coach , when an athlete is 
making crucial decision to continue sports or not. Role of a coach is 
multidis ciplinary : he is same time teacher, educator, social support and a coach. A 
coach is responsible for selecting team members . These selections can be made 
based on discussions together with athletes and other team specialists. Though, a 
coach is not expert in area of psychology and medical issues. A team needs those 
experts working to gether with a coach to get better results. All decisions for an 
athlete can be made together with all specialists (Podlog  & Dionigi  2010).  
 
Taking sport too seriously can lead to losing motivation  and possible injuries . It is 
important to keep sport intere sting and fun for athlete  (Gustafsson,  Hassmén  & 
Hassmén  2011;  Bergeron,  Michael  2010).  Both parties can give and get feedback 
and thus improve team spirit and motivation. According to this study, an athlete  
might be afraid of a reaction from a coach, for example of in case of being late from 
practises. R ole of a sport psychology to treat sport injuries can be important. Regular 
coach does not have time or abilities to handle both physical and mental training. In 
Finland, 2012, a sport psychologist  is used too rarely. Use of sport psychologist 
would achieve better results with injured athletes. Sport psychologist can affect on 
athletes mental wellbeing. Avoiding and treating injuries and their psychological 
47 
 
symptoms, like temporary loss of motivation, can be  helped in meetings of a sport 
psychologist. Sport psychologist can work together with a coach to make sure that 
athletes get wide range of coaching. For example sport psychologist can meet 
athletes once a week and talk about issues that are needed to go t hru. A coach might 
need help especially when handling psychological issues.  Stepping from youth to 
adults’ team can be hard step for an athlete; both mentally and physically. Thus, an 
athlete would like to have a person, who could help during this period.  This period 
could expose an athlete to injuries. Rehabilitation period was difficult time of injury 
to some participants of this study. Sport psychologist could be the source and bridge 
between other rehabilitation participants, for example a doctor, a co ach and a 
physiotherapist. Data transmission between all members is important, thus sport 
psychologist can help with this issue.  
 
Article  of LaRose (1988) explains how work of sport psychology  requires time and 
effort. Usually it is offered to elite athlet es. Focus is based on consulting and can be 
broadened from teaching perspective to more into field of training. The article  
concludes,  there is not enough sport psychologists to base on need for that. Often 
coaches are ex -athletes and their knowledge persp ective is based on their personal 
experiences.  The article states, i t would be good to teach some pedagogy to all 
coaches. Sport psychologist are often called as sport consultants, can be called as 
educators, not clinicians. Sport psychologist can be used more in non -elite level of 
sport, not only elite level. They can work as a link between an athlete and a coach.  
How do sport psychologists and consultants work? They make initial contact to an 
athlete, and they can define the relationship more closely. Bes t practices of working 
methods are used, reported and process is finished to action and completion (LaRose  
1988 , 141 -153).  Even today, role of a sport psychologist as a team member is not 
widely acknowledged. It would be advisable to talk more about posit ive effects what 
can be done with sport psychology.  
 
Competitive sport s can have either negative or positive effect on ath letes’ mental 
health. Role of a sport psychologist can  play a major role on deciding either positive 
or negative attitude of an athlet e. Also role of a coach affecting to decision of an 
athlete is important. Coaches shall  go to regular training where they can learn more 
48 
 
from leadership skills, self -motivation, positive expectancy, problem solving skills, 
decision making skills and commun ication skills. It is imperative to have preset 
goals and milestones in between the bigger goal  are showing that goal oriented 
coaches will make  better results , than non -goal oriented coaches. Self -motivation is 
a skill that an athlete is involved in compe titive sports. A coach can affect on this to 
positive or negative way. Self -motivation can be developed by visualization 
expectations and beliefs. Before this can happen an athlete has to have desire t o do 
this. State of mind is  strong and a creative athle te can handle with stress better than 
others , by using self -motivation. Creative  leader can have mentally strong er athletes  
in his team  (Bell 1997 ). 
 
This study is s uggesting  that swimming te ams should  include sport psychologist as a 
part of coaching team.  A team or an athlete  shall  see sport psychologist regularly. 
Even if there are no problems, avoiding worrying issues proactively is important  for 
a whole team . For example, overtraining can lead to  an injury , thus leading  to 
several causalities like loss of goals, motivation and added workload for a coach.  
After an injury, an athlete shall be able to see a sport psychologist as well as other 
medical personnel. By implementing this strategy, teams can prevent career ending 
situations with a young elite swim mer, struggling with temporarily lowered 
motivation.  Pre-emptive measures can be assessed into t he motivational issues found 
in this  study. This study suggests  that coaches shall  develop lightened and modified 
exercises, in order to avoid shoulder abrasion  and strengthen the motivation of 
young elite swimmers. Based on the results of this study about coaches taking sports 
too seriously, they shall develop more gaming -like events for young elite swimmers, 
in order to strengthen motivation and team spirit  among teenagers.  
 
This study has been given to associated participants for validation and check of 
integrity before the publication. Results of the study considering sports  and exercise  
psychology and motivation can be transformed to other junior level teams in 
Finland, possibly for other countries too.  
 
 
49 
 
9. CONCLUSION  
 
Researcher of this study is emphasizing  significance  of the topic.  Thus, this research  
is considering of perceptions of young elite swimmers, because injury related 
rehabilitations are generally u nderstood only as a physical treatment.  Instead of, 
human body must be treated as a psychosomatic whole.  Thus, it is imperative to 
understand psychological factors of an athlete during a rehabilitation process, which 
may have direct effect for a lack of m otivation. Moreover, this study  will give a new 
modus operandi for rehabilitation of young elite swimmers , in terms of sport and 
exercise psychology.  
 
9.1 Ethical consideration  
 
Before interviews , the leader of swimmin g team was contacted. She gave th e nam es 
of athle tes who had athletic injuries. Researcher of this study  contac ted athletes 
privately and got five  athletes to  the interview. All athletes signed consents to 
participate (Appendix). They had right to withd raw from this study at any time  
without t elling the reason. Thematic interviews were made privatel y with each 
athlete. Answers were  analyzed  and reported  with high confidentiality  to provide 
anonymity.  
 
9.2 Limitations of the study  
 
There are several limitations in this study. There were only fiv e interviews, as this 
was the qualitative research.  There could have been more swimmers who are still 
continuing swimming  to ensure saturation of the results . Researcher  of this study is 
also a recreational swimmer  in Swimming Jyväskylä . This is positive , because 
researcher knows more inside information about  the team and swimmers . However, 
it can be a limiting factor , because researcher is too much inside the world of 
swimming and can  be prejudiced. Interviews could have been deeper into 
psychological issues concerning life before and after injury. Now it is concentrated 
on injury and rehabilitation process. It would have been good to have clear open 
ended questions.  Due to small number of participants , athletes might feel that they 
can be recognized from t heir answer s, even if anonymous issues are dealt cle arly.  
50 
 
Inexpediency of the researcher of the study  might have effect on the end result s and 
conclusions.   
 
9.3 Practical Implications  
 
Further studies are needed for evaluating necessary wo rkload for youn g elite 
swimmers, in order to understand causes for shoulder abrasion and loss of 
motivation during rehabilitation process. One resolution to the former  could be a 
lightened, personalized  or more individual  training program for pubertal swimmers , 
for examp le gaming -like events for strengthening motivation and team spirit. This 
means taking seriously both physical and motivational aspects of pubertal athlete. 
This study is showing, that a coach might let athletes quit too soo n, if motivation of 
a swimmer is  temporarily lowered. More research is neede d to get better 
understanding for a challenging, multidisciplinary role  of a coach in Finnish 
swimming teams, which have relatively limited human resources. Advantageously, 
more studies are needed for a use of a sport psychologist for strengthening 
motivation during rehabilitation process.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
51 
 
10. REFERENCES  
 
 
Albinson , C. B & Petrie , T. A. (2003) . Cognitive appraisais, stress, and coping: 
preinjury and postinjury factors influencing psychologic al ad justment to sport 
injury. Sport Rehabil itation, 12; 306 -322.  
 
Andersen, M. B.,  & Williams. J. M.  (1988). A model of stress  and athletic injury: 
Predi ction and prevention. Journal  of Sport  & Exercise Psychology ,10, 294-306. 
 
Andersen, M.  B., & Williams,  J. M. (2007). A model of stress and athletic injury: 
Prediction and prevention. In : D. M, Smith, Bar -Eli, Essential readings in sport and 
exercise psychology. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics . 325- 330. 
 
Barefield, S.  & McCallister, S. (1997). Social support  in the athletic training  
room: Athletes’ expectations of staff and student athletic trainers. Journal of  
Athletic Training, 32, 333 -338. 
 
Bauman, J. (2005). Returning to play, the mind does matter. Clinical  
Journal of Sport Medicine, 15, 432 -435. 
 
Bell, C. C. (2008).  Promotion of Mental Health Through Coaching Competitive 
sports. Journal of the national Medical Association, 517- 520.  
 
Bergeron,  M. F. (2010).  The Young  Athlete:  Challenges  of Growth,  Development,  
and Society.  , Current  Sports  Medicine  Reports.  American  College  of 
Sports  Medicine  Nov/Dec2010,  Vol. 9 Issue  6, 356.  
 
Biddle, S.  J. H. (2007). Exercise motivation across the life span. In : D. Smith,  M. 
Bar-Eli, Essential readings in sport and exercise psychology. Champaign, IL.  
Human Kinetics . 378- 387. 
 
Blair, K. (2010). "Global Markets and Technology Business". Two full day intensive 
course lectured by Professors Kim B. Blair and Val Kratzman, Massachu setts 
Institute of Technology (USA). Organized in co -operation with Aki Karjalainen, 
Viveca JY. Co -ordinator: Mari Suoranta and Leni Kuivaniemi. University of 
Jyväskylä      
 
Brewer, B.  W., & Tripp, D.  A. (2005). 6.1 Psychological Applications in the 
Preven tion and Rehabilitation of Sport Injuries Prevention and  rehabilitation of 
injuries . In: Handbook of Research in Applied Sport and Exercise Psychology: 
International Perspectives. Morgantown: Fitness Information Technology . 319- 329. 
 
Brewer, B. W. (2010) . Adherence to Sport Injury Rehabilitation. In : S.  
Hanrahan & M. B. Andersen (Eds.), Routledge Handbook of Applied Sport  
Psychology: A Comprehensive Guide for Students and Practitioners (pp. 233 -241). 
Abingdon, Oxon, England: Routledge.  
 
52 
 
Chang -Y. C., Jun g-Huei, L., & Tsung -Min H. (2010). A Study on Table Tennis 
Players’ Psychological Skills, Sport Injuries, and Tournament Satisfaction at the 
49th World Championship. International Journal of Table Tennis Scieces,  6, 200-
202. 
 
Clement, D., & Shannon, V. (20 09). The impact of a workshop on athletic  
training students’ sport psychology behaviors. The Sport Psychologist,  
23, 504 -522. 
 
Clement & Shannon. (2011). Injured Athletes' Perceptions About Social Support. 
Journal  of Sport Rehabilitation , 20, 457 -470.  
 
Crust, L. (2002). Stress and sports injuries: How much do psychological factors such 
as stress and personality contribute to the risk sports injuries?  Retrieved  24, 03. 
2010,  from  
http://www.sportsinjurybulletin.com/archive/stress -sports -injuries.html   
 
Crust, L.  (2007). Psychological rehabilitation techniques - what psychological 
rehabilitation techniques work best in getting an athlete back to full activity  after 
injury? Retrieved 07.10. 2009,  from 
http://www.sportsinjurybulletin.com/archive/psychological -rehab.html   
 
Cupal, D. D. (1998). Psychological interventions in sport injury pre vention  
and rehabilitation. Journal of Applied Sport Psychology, 10, 103 -123. 
 
Dolan, S.  H., Houston, M.,  & Martin, S.  B. (2011). Survey  results  of the training,  
nutrition,  and mental  preparation  of triathletes:  Practical  implications  of findings . 
Journal of Sports Sciences. 29. 10, 1019  
 
Duda, J.  L. (2007). Motivation in sport settings: A goal perspective approach . In 
Smith, D. Bar -Eli, M, Essential readings in sport and exercise psychology.  
Champaign, IL.  Human Kinetics  
 
Edwards, S. , & Beale, J. (2011).  A report on the evaluation of a breath workshop for 
stress management by sport psychology students. African Jou rnal for Physical, 17, 
3. 517  -525. 
 
Eriksson, B.O., Mellstrand,  T., Peterson, L., Renström,  P., Svedmyr,  N. (1987) 
Urheilijan Terveydenhoito. Translated Tuula Lindell. Gummerus, Jyväskylä.  
 
Finch, C.  F., Ullah, S & Mclntosh, A.  S. (2011). Combining Epidem iology and 
Biomechanics in Sports Injury Prevention Research A New Approach for Selecting 
Suitable Controls. Review Article. Sports Medicine  2011.  41, 59- 72.  
 
Fisher, C. A ., & Hoisington, L.L. (1993). Injured Athletes’ Attitudes and 
judgements Toward Reh abilitation Adherence. Journ al of Athletic Training. 28, 48 -
53. 
 
 
53 
 
Frisch, A.,  Seil, R.,  Urhausen, A., Croisier, J.L.,Lair, M.L., Theisen,  
D. Analysis of sex -speciﬁc injury patterns and risk factors in young  
high-level athletes. Scandinavian  Journal of   Medicine Science in  
Sports . 834 –841 
 
Fuller, C. W., Ekstrand,  J., Junge, A., Andersen,  T. E.,  Bahr,  R., Dvorak,  J. (2006). 
Consensus statement on injury deﬁnitions and data collection procedures in studies 
of football (soccer) injuries. British Journal  of SportsMedicine, 40, 193 -201. 
 
Glazer, D.D. (2009). Development and preliminary validitation of the Injury - 
Psychological Readiness to Return to Sport (I -PRRS) Scale. Journal  of Athelitic 
Training. 44, 185 -189.  
 
Goss, J.  D. (1994).  Hardiness and Mood Disturbances in Swimming While 
Overtraining. Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology , 135-149. Champaign, IL.  
Human Kinetics.  
 
Gustafsson,  H., Hassmén,  P., & Hassmén,  N. (2011).  Are athletes  burning  out with 
passion?  European  Journal  of Sport  Science .  387 -395 
 
Hamson - Utley, J.  J. (2008). The Comeback: Rehabilitating the Psychological 
Injury.  Athletic therapy today. 35-38 Champaign, IL . Human Kinetics.  
 
Hamson -Utley, J. J. (2008).  The Comeb ack: Rehabilitating the Psychological 
Injury. Athletic  therapy  today . 35 -38. 
 
Hamson - Utley, J.  J., Martin, S., & Walters, J.  (2008). Athletic Trainers’ and 
Physical Therapists’ Perceptions of the effectiveness of Psychological Skills Within 
Sport Injury Rehabilitation Programs. Journal of Athletic Training , 258-264. 
 
Hanin, Y.  L. (2007). Emotions and athletic performance: Individual zones of 
optimal functioning model. In Smith, D. Bar -Eli, M, Essential readings in sport and 
exercise psychology.  Champaign,  IL. Human Kinetics .  
 
Hardy, C. J , Richman, J.  M. & Rosenfeld, L.  B. (1991). The Role of Social  Support  
in the Life Stress/Injury   Relationship. The Sport Psychi ologist, 128 -139. Human 
Kinetics.  
 
Heil, J. (2000). The Injures Athlete. chapter 11, in  Ha nin YL. Emotions in Sport 
Champaign, IL. Human Kine tics, 245- 265.  
 
Hämäläinen, H. (1977). Urheiluvammat: Käsikirja: ensiapu. Tieto - Akilles, 
Kangasniemi.  
 
Ivarsson, A. (2008). Psychological Predictors of Sport Injuries Among Soccer 
Players. Masters’ Thes is. Halmstad University. School of Social and Health 
Sciences.  
 
54 
 
Jaekendrup, A.  E., & Hesselink, M.  K. C. (1994). Overtraining - what do lactate 
curves tell us? British Journal of Sports Medicine . 239 - 240. 
 
Johnston, L.  H,. Carroll, D. (2010). The psycholo gical impact of injury: Effects of 
prior sport and exercise involvement. British  Journal of Sports Medicine . 34. 436 -
439. 
 
Keegan, R., Spray, C., Harwood, C.  & Lavallee, D. (2010). The Motivation al 
Atmosphere in Youth Sport: Coach, Parent, and Peer I nﬂuences on Motivation in 
Specializing Sport Participants. Journal of Applie d Sport Psychology, 22: 87 –105. 
 
Kujala, U. M., Talmela, S., Antti -Polka, I., Orava, S., Tuominen, R., &  
Myllynen, P. (1995). Acute injuries in soccer, ice hockey, volleyball,  
basketball, judo, and karate: Analysis of national registry data. British  
Medical Journal, 311: 1465  
 
Laats, E. (2011). Perceived relatedness, competence and autonomy in relation with 
successful transfer back to sport after an injury. Department of Sport Sc iences. 
University of Jyväskylä. Master’s Thesis in Sport and Exercise Psychology. (31 -40).  
 
Larmer,  P, J., Mcnair,  P. J., Smythe,  L., & Williams,  M. (2011). Ankle  
sprains:  patient  perceptions  of function  and performance  of physical  tasks.  A mixed  
methods  approach.  Disability  & Rehabilitation , 33. 23/24,  2299 - 2305.  
 
La Rose, B . (1988). What Can the   Sport Psychology Consultant Learn From the  
Educational   Consultant?  The Spo rt Psychologist, 2, 141 -153. Champaign, IL.  
Human Kinetics.  
 
Lee, S a- M. (2011 ). Finnish Athletes Expectations about Physiotherapy in Sport 
Injury Rehabilitation. Department of Sport Sciences. University of Jyväskylä. 
Master’s Thesis of Sport and Exercise Psychology. (59  -60).  
 
Lundberg, N.  R., Taniguchi, S., McCormick, B. P., & Tibbs,  C. (2011). Identity 
Negotiating: Redefining Stigmatized Identities through Adaptive Sports and 
Recreation Participation among Individuals with a Disability. Journal of Leisure 
Research . 43, 2, 205-225 
 
Lydell,  M., Hildingh,  C., Mansson,  J., Marklund,  B., & Grahn,  B. (2011).  Thoughts  
and feelings  of future  working  life as a predictor  of return  to work:  a combined  
qualitative  and quantitative  study  of sick-listed  persons  with musculoskeletal  
disorders.  Disability  & Rehabilitation  2011,  33. 13/14,  1262  -1272 . 
 
Lynch, G.  P. (1988). Athletic Inj uries and the Practicing Sport Psychologist:   
Practical Guidelines for Assisting At hletes. The Sport Psychologist, 2, 161 -167. 
Champaign, IL.  Human Kinetics .  
 
Maddison, R., & Prapavessis, H. (2005). A Psychological Approach to the 
Prediction and Preventi on of Athletic Injury. Journal of Sport & Exercise 
Psychology , 27, 289 -310. Champaign, IL.  Human Kinetics .  
55 
 
 
Maffulli,  N., & Baxter -Jones,  D. G. (1995). Common  skeletal  injuries  in young  
athletes.  Sports  Medicine . 137-149 
 
Malinauskas, R. (2010). The Associations among social support, stress, and li fe 
satisfaction as perceived by injured college athletes. Social Behavior and 
Personality : an international journal. 741 -752.  
 
Masiero, S.,  Armani,M.,  & Rosati, G. (2011). Upper -limb robot -assisted therapy in 
rehabilitation of acute stroke patients: Focu sed review and results of new 
randomized controlled trial. Journal of Rehabilitation Research & Development.  48, 
4, 355 –366 
 
Mero,  A., Nummela, A., Keskinen,K., & Häkkinen, K. (2007). Urheiluvalmennus. 
VK-Kustannus , Jyväskylä . 
 
Milton, J. (2010). Discover ing Golf’s Innermost Truths: A New Approach to 
Teaching the Game. A Commentary. Annual Review of Golf Coaching.  
International Journal of Sports Science & Coaching. 115 -117.  
 
Mitchell, I. (2011). Social support and psychological responses in sport -injury 
rehabilitation. Sport & Exercise Psychology Review, 7. 2. British Psychological 
Society.  
 
Mohad Anizu Mohd Nor. (2001). The psychological aspects of injury in sport. 
University Technologi Malaysia. J urnal Technology: 34 . 39 -50. 
 
Ninedek, A ., & Kolt,  G. S. (2000). Sport Physiotherapists' Perceptions of  
Psychological Strategies  in Sport Injury   Rehabilitation. Journal of   
Sport Rehabilitation 9, 191-206. Champaign, IL.  Human Kinetics.    
 
Nykänen, K. (1987). Urheilijan vammat: Ehkäisy, diagnoosi ja hoito. Ed. 
Kirjayhtymä . Helsinki  
 
O´Brien,M. 2000. The Team Doctor, Ethics, and Media: What Are the Dos and 
Don'ts? Internationa l Sport  Medicine  Journal, 2000, Human Kinetics  
 
Patrick, W, C., Lau, M., Cheung,W,  C. &  Lynda, R. (2007) Sport identity and sport 
participation: A cultural comparison between collectivive and individualistic 
societies. I nternational Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology , 5, 66 -81. 
 
Pensgaard,  A. M. &  Roberts, G.  C. (2002). Elite athletes’ experiences of the 
motivational climate: The coach matters. Scand inavian  Journal  of Medicine  Science 
& Sciencein Sports. 12.  54–59.  
 
Pinzon, E., Larrabee, M. (2006). Chronic Overuse Sports Injuries, Practical 
evaluation and treatment modalit ies. Practical Pain Management, 5/6. PPM 
Communications.  
56 
 
 
Podlog, L.  & Dionigi, R. (2010). Coach strategies for addressing psychosocial 
challenges during the return to sport from injury. Journal of Sports Sciences,  1197 –
1208.  
 
Podlog, L., & Eklund, R. C. (2004). Assisting injured athletes with the return  
 to spor t transition. Clinical Journal of Sport Medicine, 14, 257 -259 
 
Podlog , L, & Eklund , R. C. (2005). Return to sport after serious injury: a  
retrospective examination of motivation and psychological outcomes .  
Journal of Sport Re habilitation.14:20 -34. Champ aign, IL:  Human  
Kinetics .  
 
Podlog, L., & Eklund, R.  C. (2007). Professional Coaches’ Perspective on the 
Return to Sport Following Serious Injury. Journal of Applied sport psychology, 19, 
207 -225. 
 
Podlog, L., & Eklund, R.C. (2009) High – Level athletes’  perception of success in 
returning to sport following injury. Psyc hology of Sport and Exercise, 10,  535- 544. 
 
Podlog, L., Lochbaum,M. , & Stevens,T. (2010). Need satisfaction, well -being,  
and perceived return -to-sport outcomes among injured a thletes.  
Journal of applied  Spor t Psychology, 22: 167 –182.  
  
Porter, K., & Foster, J. (1986). The Mental Athlete. Inner Training for Peak 
Performance. A Mental training handbook for every sport and all athletes, from 
recreational to elite. WM.C.  Brown Publishers, D ubuque, Iowa  
 
Quinn, E. (2010). Treatment Tips for Immediate Sports Injury First  Aid. Retrieved  
23, 03. 2010, from  http://sportsmedicine.about.com/cs/rehab/a/rice.htm ,  
 
Raglin, J., Sawamu ra, S., Alexiou, S., Hassmen, P., & Kenttä, G. (2000). Training  
Practices and Stalenes s 13-18- Year -Old Swimmers: A Cross - Cultural  
Study. P ediatric Exercise Science,  12, 61 -70. Champaign, IL .  Human Kinetics .  
 
Renström, P., Peterson, L., Koistinen, J.,  Malcolm, R., Mattson, J., Keurulainen, J., 
& Airaksinen, O. (2002) . Urheiluvammat, ennaltaehkäisy, hoito ja kuntoutus.  VK- 
Kustannus, Jyväskylä.  
 
Ristolainen, L. (2012). Sports Injuries in Finnish elite cross -country skiers, 
swimmers, long distance runner s and soccer players. Academic dissertation. 
Publication of the ORTON Research Institute. A:32. University of Jyväskylä  
 
Ristolainen, L., Heinonen, A., Waller, B., Kujala, U.M., & Kettunen, J.A. (2009). 
Gender differences in sport injury risk and types on injuries: a retrospective twelve - 
month study on cross - country skiers, swimmers, long -distance runners and soccer 
players. Journal of S port Science and Medicine, 8, 443  -451. 
 
57 
 
Ristolainen, L., Heinonen,  A., Turunen, H.,  Mannstrom,H.,  Waller, B., Kettune n, 
J.A., & Kujala,U.M. (2010). Type of sport is related to injury pro ﬁle: A study on 
cross country skiers, swimmers, long -distance runners and soccer players.  A 
retrospective 12 -month study Scandinavian Journal of Medicine &Science in Sports.  
20, 384 -93.  
 
Ristolainen, L.,  Kettunen, J.  A., Kujala, U.  M., & Heinonen, A. (2011). Sport 
Injuries as the main cause of sport career termination among Finnish top -level 
athletes. Original article. Europe an Journal of Sport Science , 1 -9.  
 
Roi, S.  G. (2010). Re turn to competition following a thletic injury: Sports 
rehabilitation as a whole.  Apunts Med Esport.181 - 184. 
 
Robbins, F. E., & Rosenfeld, L. B. (2001). Athletes’ perceptions of social  
support provided by their head coach, assistant coach, and athletic trainer ,  
pre-injury and during rehabilitation. Journal of Sport Behavior, 24, 277  -297. 
 
Russel, H., Laurier, W. (2011) . What Do Injured Athletes Want From Their Health 
Care Professionals? In : Sport Psychology & Counceling . 18-21 Edited by, Adam 
Naylor, EdD, Rep ort Editor . International Journal of Athletic Therapy & Training.   
 
Russel, P. (2011) The psychological impact of sports injury. Retrieved 18, 04. 2011,  
from http://www.thefifthspace.c om/pdfs/psychologyofinjury.pdf  
 
Ryan, R.M., & Deci, E.L. (2000). Self -Determination Theory and the facilitation of 
intrinsic motivation, social development and well being. American Psycho logist, 55 , 
68–78. 
 
Saltapidas,  H., & Ponsford,  J. (2007).  The Influ ence of Cultural  Background  
on Motivation  for and Participation  in Rehabilitation  and Outcome  Following  
Traumatic  Brain  Injury.  Journal  of Head  Trauma  Rehabilitation . 132 -140. 
 
San Jose, A. (2003). Injury of elite athletes: Sport - and gender - related 
representations. Journal of Spor t and Exercise Psychology, 1, 434  -459. 
 
Sandlund,  E.S., & Norlander,  T. (2000). The effects  of tai chi chuan  relaxation  and 
exercise  on stress  responses  and well-being:  an overview  of research.  International  
Journal  of Stress  Management . 139 -149.  
 
Santhosh, A.  M., Rajitha Menon, A., & Jayan, C. (2008). Theatre - Based 
Psychological Intervention to Control Negative Attitude Towards Sport Injury. 
Journal of the Indian Academy of Appl ied Psychology. 34. Special Issue. 151  -157. 
 
Steffen, K., Andersen, T.  E., Krosshaug, T., Mechelen, W.  V., Myklebust,  G., 
Verhagen, E.  A., & Bahr, R. 2010. ECSS Position Statement 2009: Prevention of 
acute sports injuries. European Jou rnal of Sport Science, 223.  
 
58 
 
Tracey, J. (2008). Inside the Clinic: He alth Professionals’ Role in Their Clients’ 
Psychological Rehabilitation. Journ al of Sport Rehabilitation , 17, 413 –43. Human 
Kinetics.  
 
Tse, P.,  & Chan, K.  M. (1987). The role of Primary Care in Sports Injuries. 
Presented at the WONGA Asia -Pacific Regional Conference inSeptember 1987. 
Department of Orthopedic & Traumatic Surgery. The Chinese University of Hong 
Kong. Vol. 9. No 12.  
 
Udry, E., & Andersen, M. B . (2008).  In: Horn, T, S . Advances i n sport psychology. 
Chapter 17. 3rd edition . Human Kinetics.  
 
Vallerand, R.  J., & Perreault, S. (2007). Intrinsic and extrinsic motivation in sport: 
towards a hierarchical model.  In Smith, D. Bar -Eli, M, Essential readings in sport 
and exercise psychology.  Champaign, IL.  Human Kinetics  
 
Vuori, I., Taimela, S., & Kujal a, U. (2005). Liikuntalääketiede . Duodecim , 
Hämeenlinna . 
 
Weinberg, R,  S., Gould, D. (2007). Foundations of sport and exercise psychology. 
4th edition.  Champaign, IL.  Human Kinetics  
 
Weiss, M.  R. Amorose, A.  J. In Horn, T, S. (2008).  Chapter 7.  Advances i n sport 
psychology. 3rd edition. Miami Uni. Oxford, Ohio. Human Kinetics.  
  
Wiese, D.  M., & Weise M.  R. (1987). Psychological rehabilitation and physical 
injury: Implications for  the sports medicine team. The Sport Psychologist, 1, 318 -
330.  
 
Wiese,  D. M, Weiss, M.  R, & Yukelson,  D. P. (1991). Sport Psychology in the  
Training Room: A Survey of  Athletic Trainers. The Sport Psychohgist,   
1991, 5, 15 -24. Champaign, IL.  Human Kinetics .  
 
William A. Sands, W.  A., McNeal, J.  R.,  Jemni,  M. &  Penitent,  G. (201 1). 
Thinking Sensibly About Injury Prevention and  Safety . Original review article. 
Science of Gymnastics Journal. 3. 3,  43 – 58 
 
Williams, J.  M., Hogan, T.  D., & Andersen, M.  B. (1993). Positive States of Mind 
and Athletic Injury Risk. Psychosomatic Medic ine. 55: 468 -472. 
 
Young  -Eun Noh, Y - E., Morris,  T., & Andersen, M.B. (2005).  Psychosocial Factors 
and Ballet Injuries. International Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology . 3, 79  -
90. 
 
 
 
 
 
59 
 
APPENDIXES  
1. Information sheet for athletes  
2. Information co nsent form, for athletes  
3. Information consent for parents  
4. Themes for interview  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60 
 
Appendix 1.  
Information sheet for athletes  
 
Tietoa ’ Nuorten uimareiden urheiluvammat ’ -
tutkimuksesta  
 
Tutkimuksen tarkoituksena on selvittää uimareide n 
urheiluvammoja, niiden laatua, kestoa ja miten urheilija on 
kokenut vammautumisen. Tutkimusryhmään haetaan 
haastateltavia, joilla on parhaillaan tai on ollut jonkinasteinen 
urheiluvamma, joka on vaatinut kuntoutusta ja jonka takia 
uimari on joutunut olem aan poissa aktiiviurheilusta. 
Tutkimuksesta saatuja tuloksia voidaan hyödyntää urheilijoiden 
psykologisessa valmennuksessa ja vammojen ehkäisyssä. 
Tavoitteena on luoda seuroille paremmat mahdollisuudet 
ehkäistä urheiluvammoja ja maksimoida urheilijoiden 
suorituskykyä terveyttä vaarantamatta.  
Tutkimus tehdään haastattelemalla uimareita. Tutkimuksen 
tulokset ja koko haastattelu ovat luottamuksellisia.  
Tutkimuksesta voi  kieltäytyä tai vetäytyä milloin vain ilman 
seuraamuksia ja ilman, että se mitenkään vaikut taisi 
harrastus mahdollisuuksii n. Tuloksia käytetään anonyymisti eli 
ilman, että henkilöllisyys paljastuu, tieteellisiin tarkoituksiin 
kuten julkaisuihin tieteellisissä ja uintia k äsittelevissä 
aikakauslehdissä. Tähän tutkimukseen osallistumiseen ei 
tiedetä  liittyvän minkäänlaisia riskejä.  
Annamme mielellään lisää tietoa tutkimukseemme liittye n.  
 
Jyväskylä 4.4.2011  
i Lehtinen, liik. yo  
Mari Lehtinen, liik. yo                    Prof. Taru Lintunen  
Tel: 040- 5764118              Tel: 040 -7532158  
Email:  mari.j .lehtinen@gmail.com                         
 Email: Taru.Lintunen@jyu.fi  
61 
 
Appendix 2  
Information consent form, for athletes  
           
 
 
 
 
 
Suostumuslomake  
 
Nuorten uimareiden urheiluvammat -tutkimus  
 
 
 
Minä_______________________________________________
_olen lukenut tutkimusta esittelevän lomakkeen ja minulla on 
ollut mahdollisuus keskustella tutkimuksen edustajan kanssa. 
Suostun osallistumaan tutkimukseen tietäen, että voin milloin 
tahansa, syytä kertomatta vetäytyä pois tutkimuksesta. 
Vetäytyminen tutk imuksesta ei tule mitenkään vaikuttamaan 
kohteluuni, jatkooni tai harjoitteluuni . Vastaan kaikkiin 
kysymyksiin omasta halustani.  
 
 
 
Tutkittavan allekirjoitus ja 
nimenselvennys ………………………………………………………..  
 
 
Päivämäärä    
 ……………………………………………………………….  
62 
 
Appendix 3  
Information consent for parents  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Suostumuslomake huoltajille  
 
Nuorten uimareiden urheiluvammat -tutkimus  
 
 
 
 
Minä_______________________________________________
_olen lukenut tutkimusta esittelevän lomakkeen ja minulla on 
ollut mahdollisuus keskustella tutkimuksen edustajan kanssa. 
Huollettavani voi osallistua tutkimukseen. Tiedän, että hän voi 
milloin tahansa, syytä kertomatta vetäytyä pois tutkimuksesta. 
Vetäytyminen tutkimuksesta ei tule mitenkään vaikuttamaan 
kohteluun, jatkoon tai harjoitteluun.  
 
 
 
Huoltajan allekirjoitus  ja nimenselvennys 
____________________________________  
 
 
Päivämäärä    
 ……………………………………………………………  
63 
 
Appendix 4  
Themes for interview  
 
Teemahaastattelu  
 
1. Urheilu -ura ennen vammautumista  
- Kuvaile elämäntilanteesi ennen vammautumista: henkise t –ja 
fyysiset resurssit, perhe, opiskelu, ystäväsuhteet, seurustelu?  
- Kuvaile suhdettasi joukkuetovereihin  ennen vammautumista  
- Kuinka sinun ja valmentajan välinen rooli oli toiminut ennen 
vammautumista?  
- Kuvaile harjoittelumääriä ennen loukkaantumista  
- Kuink a määrittelisit henkisen vireytesi juuri ennen 
vammautumista?  
- Mitkä olivat urheilulliset tavoitteesi ennen vammautumista?  
 
2. Vammautuminen  
- Miltä vammautuminen tuntui henkisesti? Kuvaile ensireaktioita 
omin sanoin.  
- Kuinka määrittelisit henkisen vireytesi vamm autumisen aikana?  
- Kuinka joukkuekaverisi ja valmentajasi reagoivat 
vammautumiseen?  
- Tuliko vammautumisen aikana pelko urheilullisten tavoitteiden 
menettämisestä?  
 
3. Kuntoutus  
- Millaiset puitteet kuntoutuksessa oli?  
- Tunsitko saavasi tarpeeksi psyykkistä valmen nusta 
kuntoutuksen aikana?  
- Kuinka joukkuekaverisi ja valmentajasi tukivat sinua 
kuntoutuksen aikana?  
- Kuinka määrittelisit henkisen vireytesi kuntoutumisen aikana?  
- Palautuiko kuntoutuksen aikana usko urheilullisten tavoitteiden 
uudelleen saavuttamiseksi?  
 
 
 
 
64 
 
4. Urheilu -ura kuntoutuksen jälkeen  
- Kuinka määrittelisit henkisen vireytesi kuntoutumisen jälkeen?  
- Millaiseksi olet kokenut roolisi joukkueeseen ja valmentajaan  
kuntoutuksen jälkeen?  
- Mitkä  olivat  urheilulliset tavoitteesi kuntoutuksen jälkeen?  
- Tunnetko pel koa loukkaantuvasi uudelleen?  
- Onko sinulla jotain tulevaisuuden suunnitelmia urheilun 
alueella?  
 
 
 
 
 
