NOTE TO USERS 
This reproduction is the best copy available. 
UMI" 

INJURY IN VARSITY SWIMMERS: IDENTIFYING RISK FACTORS AND 
EXPLORING ATHLETES' REHABILITATION EXPERIENCES 
ALISA ABGAROV 
A THESIS SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS 
FOR THE DEGREE OF 
MASTER OF SCIENCE 
GRADUATE PROGRAM IN KINESIOLOGY AND HEALTH SCIENCE 
YORK UNIVERSITY, 
TORONTO, ONTARIO 
AUGUST 2009 
1*1 Library and Archives 
Canada 
Published Heritage 
Branch 
395 Wellington Street 
OttawaONK1A0N4 
Canada Bibliotheque et 
Archives Canada 
Direction du 
Patrimoine de I'edition 
395, rue Wellington 
Ottawa ON K1A 0N4 
Canada 
Your file Votre reference 
ISBN: 978-0-494-53648-3 
Our file Notre reference 
ISBN: 978-0-494-53648-3 
NOTICE: AVIS: 
The author has granted a non­
exclusive license allowing Library and 
Archives Canada to reproduce, 
publish, archive, preserve, conserve, 
communicate to the public by 
telecommunication or on the Internet, 
loan, distribute and sell theses 
worldwide, for commercial or non­
commercial purposes, in microform, 
paper, electronic and/or any other 
formats. L'auteur a accorde une licence non exclusive 
permettant a la Bibliotheque et Archives 
Canada de reproduire, publier, archiver, 
sauvegarder, conserver, transmettre au public 
par telecommunication ou par Nntemet, preter, 
distribuer et vendre des theses partout dans le 
monde, a des fins commerciales ou autres, sur 
support microforme, papier, electronique et/ou 
autres formats. 
The author retains copyright 
ownership and moral rights in this 
thesis. Neither the thesis nor 
substantial extracts from it may be 
printed or otherwise reproduced 
without the author's permission. L'auteur conserve la propriete du droit d'auteur 
et des droits moraux qui protege cette these. Ni 
la these ni des extraits substantiels de celle-ci 
ne doivent etre imprimes ou autrement 
reproduits sans son autorisation. 
In compliance with the Canadian 
Privacy Act some supporting forms 
may have been removed from this 
thesis. Conformement a la loi canadienne sur la 
protection de la vie privee, quelques 
formulaires secondaires ont ete enleves de 
cette these. 
While these forms may be included 
in the document page count, their 
removal does not represent any loss 
of content from the thesis. Bien que ces formulaires aient inclus dans 
la pagination, il n'y aura aucun contenu 
manquant. 
1+1 
Canada 
INJURY IN VARSITY SWIMMERS: IDENTIFYING RISK 
FACTORS AND EXPLORING ATHLETES' REHABILITATION 
EXPERIENCES 
By ALISA ABGAROV 
a thesis submitted to the Faculty of Graduate Studies of York 
University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree 
of 
MASTER OF SCIENCE 
©2009 
Permission has been granted to: a) YORK UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES 
to lend or sell copies of this thesis in paper, microform or 
electronic formats, and b) LIBRARY AND ARCHIVES CANADA to 
reproduce, lend, distribute, or sell copies of this thesis anywhere in 
the world in microform, paper or electronic formats and to 
authorize or procure the reproduction, loan, distribution or sale of 
copies of this thesis anywhere in the world in microform, paper or 
electronic formats. 
The author reserves other publication rights, and neither the 
thesis nor extensive extracts from it may be printed or otherwise 
reproduced without the author's written permission. 
IV 
Abstract 
Swimming is one of the most popular sports worldwide, yet is associated with significant 
injury rates (e.g., McMaster & Troup, 1993). Despite this, little research has focused 
specifically on swimmers' injury profiles, risk factors, or experiences in the injury 
rehabilitation process. Of particular interest are varsity swimmers, given the unique 
constraints of a relatively short season and high levels of training while pursing full-time 
academics. This thesis contains two studies. The first examined swimming-related injury 
profiles and training-related risk factors associated with injuries among Ontario varsity 
swimmers. The second focused on gaining understanding of varsity athletes' experiences 
going through the injury rehabilitation process. Findings suggest a high prevalence of 
injury with many athletes training through injuries, and gender differences in injury 
profiles such as injury recovery duration. An earlier start age, taking time off, and a 
history of injury were associated with higher risk of varsity injury. Furthermore, athletes 
experienced varied injury paths, leading to different interactions with significant others, 
mixed emotional experiences and different coping strategies. These findings are 
discussed in the context of advancing understanding of psychological impacts of injury 
on athletes' participation in sport. 
V 
Acknowledgment 
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisors Dr. Jessica Fraser-Thomas and Dr. 
Joseph Baker, whose expertise, understanding, and patience added considerably to my 
graduate experience. I would like to thank the other member of my committee Dr. Parissa 
Safai for the assistance she provided me at the rough patches of the research project. 
A very special thanks goes out to Dr. Alison Macpherson without whose motivation and 
encouragement I would not have considered a graduate career in Kinesiology & Health 
Sciences at York University. Alison is the one professor/teacher who truly made a 
difference in my life; I doubt that I will ever be able to convey my appreciation fully, but 
I owe her my eternal gratitude. 
Thanks also goes out to those who provided me with statistical advice at times of critical 
need Dr. Alison Macpherson, Mirka Ondrack, Dr. Bryn Greer-Wootten, Dr. Chris Arden, 
Jane Logan, Brad Meisner, Sarah Jeffery, and Natasha Spassiani. 
I would also like to thank my friends in the "Baker" and "Fraser-Thomas" labs, 
particularly Jane Logan, for our philosophical debates, exchanges of knowledge, skills, 
and venting of frustration during my graduate program, which helped enrich the 
experience. I would also like to thank my parents for the support they provided me 
through my life. I must acknowledge my partner in life and best friend, Alexandre 
Boulanger, without whose love, encouragement and editing assistance, I would not have 
finished this thesis. 
vi 
Table of Contents 
Page 
Abstract ii 
Acknowledgements iii 
Table of Contents iv 
List of Tables vi 
List of Figures vii 
1. General Introduction 1 
2. Literature Review 3 
3. Summary and Thesis Objectives 12 
4. Manuscript 1 14 
Abstract 15 
Introduction 17 
Methods 18 
Participants 18 
Data Collection 18 
Analysis 19 
Results 20 
Discussion 23 
Appended Tables 28 
Appended Figures 29 
5. Manuscript 2 34 
Abstract 35 
Introduction 36 
Methods 39 
Participants 39 
Data Collection 39 
Analysis 41 
Other Considerations 41 
Results & Discussion 42 
Athletes' Injury Paths 42 
Understanding Athletes Relations with Others 43 
vii 
Athletes' Coping Strategies 60 
General Discussion 69 
Appended Tables 73 
Appended Figures 82 
6. General Discussion 87 
Implications 89 
Future Directions 92 
Conclusion 93 
7. References of Manuscript 1 94 
8. References of Manuscript 2 97 
9. References of Thesis (other than in manuscripts) 102 
Appendix A: Letter of Information and Informed Consent for Athletes 108 
Appendix B: Athlete questionnaire 109 
Appendix C: Flow Diagram of Athlete Progression Through the Study 113 
Appendix D: Gender-Specific and Gender-Mixed Descriptive 
Results of Logistic Regression Analysis Variables 114 
Appendix E: Results of t-tests Examining Gender Differences 
on Logistic Regression Analysis Variables 115 
Appendix F: Letter of Information and Informed Consent for Athletes 116 
Appendix G: Quantitative Questionnaire-Study 2 117 
Appendix H: Interview Guide 121 
Appendix I: Supplementary Table- Qualitative Interview 125 
Appendix J: Training Volume and Injury Onset Plot Throughout Swimming 
Career (Participants 1-12) 126 
viii 
List of Tables 
Page 
Table 1.1 Odds Ratios and 95% Confidence Intervals for Occurrence of New 
Injury During the 2007/08 Varsity Swimming Season 28 
Table 2.1: Descriptive Information for Study Participants, Including Age, 
Gender, Injury History and Current Participation Status 73 
Table 2.2: Summary of Athletes Experiences with Significant Others 78 
Table 2.3: Summary of Athletes Coping Strategies Dealing with Their 
Injury/Injuries 80 
ix 
List of Figures 
Page 
Figure 1.1: Prevalence of Injury Onset by Age for Each Injury Location 
as Reported by the Athletes 29 
Figure 1.2: Prevalence of Injury during the 2007/08 Varsity Season 31 
Figure 1.3: Distribution of Injury Location before and during the 
2007/08 Varsity Season 32 
Figure 1.4: Injury Duration by Gender 33 
Figure 2.1.a-e: Athletes' Interactions with [Significant Others] and 
Subsequent Emotions & Judgments Throughout the Injury Process 82 
1 
General Introduction 
The Sporting Goods Manufacturers Association (SGMA) estimates there were more than 
18 million fitness/competitive swimmers in the United States in 2007 (SGMA, 2008). 
In general, literature supports the notion that sport participation has a positive overall 
influence on athletes' health and development. More specifically, research proposes that 
sport may promote individuals to have healthy, satisfying, and productive lives 
(Hamilton, 2004). 
Research on sports injuries has found varying rates across sports. For example, 
American yacht sailing injury incidence has been reported as 8.8 injuries per 1000 hours 
of exposure (Neville, Molloy, Brooks, Speedy, & Atkinson, 2006), women's rugby at 
10.0 injuries per 1000 player hours (Shick, Molloy, & Wiley, 2008), Australian football 
at 18.0 injuries per 1000 hours of exposure (Romiti, Finch, & Gabbe, 2008), soccer at 
30.0 injuries per 1000 playing hours (Junge, Dvorak, & Graf-Baumann, 2004), and rugby 
at 32-230 injuries per player per 1000 match hours (Fuller, Laborde, Leather, & Molloy, 
2008). In regard to swimming, one study found that swimming had 3.8 injuries for 
females and 4.0 injuries for males, per 1000 exposure hours (Wolf, Ebinger, Lawler, & 
Britton 2009). Another study found that swimming was had 2.7 injuries per 1000 hours, 
of which 1.6 per 1000 hours were overuse injuries, and 1.1 per 1000 hours were acute 
injuries caused sports other than swimming training itself (Goekint, Cumps, & Meeusen 
2007). While these figures appear to suggest a low injury rate among swimmers, this data 
could be misleading, as swimming injuries are of a chronic nature, with gradual onset, 
making classification more complex compared to injuries in other sports. 
2 
Although swimming is commonly assumed to be a sport with low incidence of 
injury compared to other sports, research in swimming has found that nearly 75% of age 
group and developmental swimmers experience an injury at some point in their career 
(McMaster, 1996). Furthermore, a national survey of 1262 American swimmers (993 age 
group swimmers, 198 senior development swimmers and 71 national team swimmers) 
reported a 73% injury prevalence rate (McMaster,& Troup 1993). Despite of those high 
numbers of injury, little research has focused specifically on swimmers' injury trends, 
risk factors and experiences in the injury rehabilitation process. 
Flint's (1998) comprehensive literature review describing the complexity and 
multifactorial nature of the psychology of sport injuries outlines several directions for 
future research in the field. In particular, she emphasizes the need to integrate quality 
research from sport psychology and sports medicine because there is a poor 
understanding of the biophysiological and psychological sequence of injury. 
Consequently, she suggests that additional attention be directed to the collection of high 
quality and timely data with generalizable results that can inform theoretical and practical 
applications to deal with the psychological aspects of athletic injuries. 
Of particular interest for the current investigations are varsity swimmers, given 
the unique constraints of the university/college swimming season such as the short 
competitive season duration (i.e. 6-7 months) and the high level training of these athletes 
engage in while pursing a full-time academic career. 
3 
This thesis contains two studies exploring injuries in this unique population. The 
purpose of the first study was to identify current injury trends within the Ontario varsity 
population, to provide a descriptive profile of varsity swimmers' injuries over the course 
of one season, and identify training-related risk factors associated with swimming 
injuries. The purpose of the second study was to gain understanding of athletes' 
experiences going through the injury process while swimming for a varsity team. 
Collectively, this mixed-methods approach facilitated investigating the psychology of 
injury in varsity swimmers. 
Literature Review 
Injury Trends and Risk Factors 
The etiology of microtraumatic injuries is distinct when compared to 
macrotraumatic injuries (Leaderbetter, 1992). With microtraumatic injuries, it is likely 
that athletes sustained their injury over a period of weeks or even months, with gradual 
increase in pain and decrease of performance. These athletes experience sport injury in a 
different manner than athletes who received an acute injury such as broken arm. 
Shoulder pain is the most common musculo-skeletal complaint in competitive 
swimmers (Brushoj, Bak Johannsen, & Fauno, 2007). A British survey found that 67% of 
swimmers suffer from shoulder pain at some point in their career (McFarland & Wasik 
1996; Pollard 2001). In addition to the shoulder, other common injury sites are the knee 
(Fowler & Regan 1986; Sallis, Jones, Sunshine, Smith, & Simon, 2001), ankle (Wolf, 
Ebinger, Lawler, & Britton, 2009), groin (Grote, Lincoln, & Gamble, 2004; Tonsoline, 
1993), and elbow (Fowler & Regan 1986; Magra, Caine, & Mafulli, 2007). 
4 
Given the prevalence of injury in this population, understanding the antecedents 
of and risk factors for injury is important. Several studies have suggested training-related 
risk factors for injury such as swimming with paddles (i.e., increased resistance against 
the water poses as a stressor for the shoulder; Kammer, Young, & Neidfeldt, 1999). 
Furthermore, high frequency, intensity, and volume of training can place the competitive 
swimmer at risk of developing swimming related injury ( Brenner, 2007; Maffulli & 
Pintoore 1990). One study found that the incidence of stress injuries increased as distance 
swam per year increased (i.e., an increase of 0.57 injuries per 1000km swum; Heinonen, 
Ristolainen, & Kujala, 2007). In addition, findings show that time in sport increases 
prevalence of injury (McMaster, 1999; McMaster & Troup, 1993). 
Previous studies examining predictors of shoulder pain reveal that there are a 
range of factors that increase athletes' injury risk including long swimming experience, 
heavy training volumes, stroke choice such as butterfly and front crawl, high workout 
intensity, excessive upper body weight training, incorrect stretching and use of hand 
paddles (O'Donnell, 2005). However, no studies, to our knowledge, have considered the 
risk factors for injury in varsity swimmers as opposed to the club swimming. 
Exploring Athletes' Injury Experiences 
Investigation of previous research reveals gaps in the literature examining 
athletes' injury experiences. While some researchers have considered athletes' return to 
sport following serious acute injuries (Podlog & Eklund, 2006), little work has addressed 
their return to sport following gradual onset injuries. In particular, there is speculation 
that many athletes train through microtraumatic injuries (Flint, 1998). The section that 
5 
follows outlines five theoretical frameworks that have been used to guide and understand 
the psychology of sport injuries: (a) the Return to Sport Model (Taylor & Taylor, 1997), 
(b) the Cognitive Appraisal Model (Lazarus &Folkman, 1984), (c) the Integrated Model 
(Wiese-Bjornstal, Smith, Shaffer & Morrey 1998), (d) The Biopsychological Model 
(Brewer, Anderson & Van Raalte, 2002) and (e) Self-Determination Theory (Ryan & 
Deci, 2000). 
The Return to Sport Model (Taylor & Taylor, 1997) is composed of five physical 
and psychological stages (i.e. initial return, recovery confirmation, return of physical and 
technical abilities, high intensity training, and return to competition) and contends that 
athletes' ability to pass successfully from one stage to the next in their return to sport is 
strongly dependent upon the injury healing, physical conditioning, and psychological 
rehabilitation that has proceeded the return to sport phase of recovery. 
Despite some research using this framework, it has been criticized as being 
unclear (Podlog & Eklund, 2007) and failing "to account for individual differences with 
regard to athletes ability to move from one stage to the next" (Eklund & Bianco, 2004, 
P.593). Furthermore, the model is uni-directional, and fails to recognize the effect of 
injury flare-ups in athletes with chronic injuries. Perhaps as a result, the model has had 
little empirical evaluation and support (Podlog & Eklund, 2007). 
The Cognitive Appraisal Model is based heavily on stress and coping theory 
(Brewer 2003). Lazarus (1991) defined coping as individuals' ever changing efforts to 
manage circumstances appraised as stressful. Cognitive appraisals are processes through 
which a potentially stressful situation is assessed and the result of such appraisals 
6 
influence the way individuals cope with the stressful situation. In this model, cognition 
plays a central role in determining psychological reaction to sport injury. Many 
researchers have adopted the cognitive appraisal model as a framework for understanding 
and examining the psychological response to athletic injury (Brewer 1998; Thatcher et al. 
2007; Wiese-Bjornstal et all998). 
The Integrated Model proposes that responses to injury are influenced by pre- and 
post injury variables (Wiese-Bjornstal et al. 1998). Personal and situational 
characteristics directly affect the cognitive appraisal of injury and rehabilitation 
interpretation by the athlete. That, in turn, affect three inter-related parameters such as 
emotional responses, behavioral responses, and recovery outcomes, all of which dictate 
the psychological response to injury. In addition, the Integrated Model holds that the 
psychological response may change over time (Wiese-Bjornstal et al. 1998). In this 
model, personal and situational factors continuously exert their effect in a dynamic 
manner. 
Despite the sound theory underpinning the Integrated Model, there is some debate 
regarding its value for understanding the psychology of sports injury. Walker and 
Thatcher (2007) concluded that, following the development of the Integrated Model in 
1998, there have been relatively few attempts to explore its proposals. They criticized the 
limited research of the Integrated Model, and added that attempts to explore the model 
have many limitations such as retrospective designs, response bias, failure to explore the 
full injury experience and responses to a hypothetical injury scenario. In contrast, others 
7 
(e.g., Albinson, 2003; Brewer, 2003; Johnson, 1997) suggest that there is considerable 
support in the literature for the Integrated Model. 
The Biopsychological Model was introduced by Brewer et al. (2002) in order to 
widen the focus of sport injury rehabilitation research and provide a framework 
incorporating existing models in the sport injury rehabilitation field (Brewer, 2003). The 
model includes 7 key components: injury, sociodemographic factors, biological factors, 
psychological factors, social/contextual factors, intermediate biopsychological outcomes, 
and injury rehabilitation outcomes. Injury was proposed to initiate the model. The type, 
cause, severity, location and history influence the biological, psychological, social and 
contextual elements of the model. Socio-demographic factors (e.g. age, gender, race, 
ethnicity, and socioeconomic status) have an influence on biological, psychological, 
social and contextual factors. Centrally positioned in the model, psychological factors 
have a two way relationship with biological and social/contextual factors. Psychological 
factors and intermediate biopsychological outcomes (e.g. range of motion, strength, joint 
laxity, pain, endurance, rate of recovery) affect each other. Intermediate biopsychological 
outcomes affect the sport injury rehabilitation outcomes. Finally, psychological factors 
and sport injury rehabilitation factors affect each other. This model provides a broad-
based framework for investigating the sport injury rehabilitation process and offers 
potential explanations for how psychological factors affect sport injury rehabilitation 
outcomes (Brewer, 2003). Recently, Podlog and Eklund (2007) examined the 
Biopsychological Model, and found that the model provided only a general framework, 
8 
without addressing the transitions from rehabilitation phase to training and competition, 
critical aspects of the successful return to sport. 
In light of the limitations of existing models, Podlog and Eklund (2007) suggested 
Self-Determination Theory (SDT) as a viable framework for understanding psychosocial 
aspects of return to sport following serious injury. SDT focuses on the social-contextual 
factors that facilitate or undermine health, psychological well-being and intrinsic 
motivation. The theory proposes that many of the actions and behaviors people perform 
are not energized purely by intrinsic motives (Ryan & Deci, 2000), rather, motivational 
states exist along a self-determination continuum with amotivation representing the least 
self-determined form of motivation and intrinsic motivation reflecting the highest level of 
self-determination. 
Extrinsically motivated behaviors cover the continuum between amotivation and 
intrinsic motivation, varying in the extent to which their regulation is self-determined. 
These include external regulation, introjected regulation, identified regulation and 
integrated regulation. (Ryan & Deci, 2000). Introjected regulation involves behaviors that 
are performed to avoid guilt or anxiety or to attain ego enhancements such as pride (Ryan 
& Deci, 2000). Identified regulation is exhibited when an individual engages in a 
behavior out of personal evaluation and endorsement of the behavior (Ryan & Deci, 
2000). Integrated regulation occurs when identified regulations are evaluated and 
assimilated into the self in line with one's values and needs (Ryan & Deci, 2000). 
In a recent literature review, Podlog and Eklund (2007) evaluated return to sport 
within the self determination perspective. Their perspective was that STD provided "a 
9 
comprehensive perspective on the salient issues facing athletes returning to sport from 
injury". In addition, they stated that the "examination of the psychosocial literature on 
return to sport following injury presents that the returning athlete commonly experience 
concerns and/or difficulties in the areas of competency, and relatedness" (Podlog & 
Eklund, 2007, p. 542). 
The current studies further investigate SDT as an explanatory framework of the 
injury process and the nature of motivation to return to sport in determining the success 
or failure of the rehabilitation process. For example, emotions such as fear, anger, or 
depression are normal responses to traumatic injury (Quackenbush, 1994; Udry 1997) 
and are typically most pronounced during the initial phase of the injury when athletes 
experience significant emotional upheaval, but these emotions continue throughout the 
rehabilitation process. As such, the nature of athletes' motivation to recover from the 
injury may affect how athletes contextualize their injury and mobilize coping 
mechanisms, ultimately determining the quality of their return to sport. The sections that 
follow outline relevant literature to athlete injury experiences, using the three basic 
psychological needs of the SDT (competence, autonomy, and relatedness) as a 
framework. 
Competence: Negative Affect. Fear of re-injury, negative affect, and 
catastrophizing are significantly correlated with athletes' confidence in their ability to 
return to their sport (Tripp, 2007). Emotions such as depression, anger, fear, tension, 
disgust, anxiety, and panic have been shown to create psychophysiological reactions that 
contribute to increased sensation of injury pain (Quackenbush, 1994). Fear of 
10 
movement/re-injury is a specific form of avoidance observed in people with pain, 
whereby the individual believes that movement and physical activity may cause re-injury 
(Vlaeyen, 1995; Roelofs, Sluiter, Frings-Dresen, Goossens, & Boersma, 2007). 
Collectively, these factors undermine athletes' feelings of competence. 
Relatedness: 
Social Support. During the injury process, athletes may experience feelings of 
separation, loneliness, guilt and a loss of identity and independence because they feel 
they are no longer contributing to the team and are reliant upon others in the 
rehabilitative process (Lewis-Griffith, 1982). Social support is a key factor in dealing 
emotionally with being injured and recovering from an injury (Udry, 1997) and has been 
identified as an important factor affecting athletes' beliefs about the value of 
rehabilitation (Bricker, 2006). 
Social support can come from family, friends, coaches, sport-psychology 
professionals, and perhaps most important, from the therapist and or athletic therapist 
performing the rehabilitation (Bricker, 2006). If athletes perceive a high level of social 
support from their medical team, this could serve to maximize the effectiveness of their 
rehabilitation process (Bricker, 2006). Athletic therapists and physiotherapists play an 
important role in athletes' rehabilitation process, the social support offered by the 
medical team helps athletes acquire stronger beliefs about their capacity to successfully 
overcome and recover from their injuries (Bricker, 2006). 
Furthermore, coaches are present throughout athletes' injury process and play 
many roles for them. Podlog (2007) discussed the importance of coaches throughout 
11 
athletes' injury experiences, suggesting that professional coaches possess a good 
understanding of athletes' experiences and perceptions of the return to sport following an 
injury. However, it is not always clear whether coaches actually practice their 
recommendations on how to deal with the injured athlete. It is important to keep in mind 
that the medical team, coaching staff, and other significant members surrounding the 
athletes, are part of a great group of the community. Research of the literature reveals that 
the often athletes are indirectly encouraged by the community to accept risky behaviors 
as it relates to sport participation and consequent injury. (Young, White and McTeer, 
1994) More specifically, research by Nixon (1992) revealed that athletes are playing with 
pain and injury is very common, and such behavior is considered as normal within the 
competitive setting, even when athletes are aware of negative consequences of their 
actions. 
Physical Rehabilitation Adherence. Adherence rates to rehabilitation program 
have been reported as high as 91% and as low as 30-40% (Brewer, 1998; Niven, 2007) 
while rehabilitation non-adherence rates are in the range of 30%-70% (Miline et. al 2005; 
Taylor & May, 1996). It has been suggested that adherence may diminish further during 
a lengthy rehabilitation period or when rehabilitation is home-based (Udry & Andersen, 
2002). Previously injured athletes, compared to first time injured athletes, are more 
diligent in performing their rehabilitation exercises (Miline, 2005). Furthermore, athletes 
who do not have confidence in the rehabilitation program are less likely to comply with it 
and consequently might progress more slowly (Bricker & Fry , 2006). 
12 
Summary and Thesis Objectives 
Previous research has reported that swimming has a large incidence of injury. 
Unfortunately there have been no investigations of injury incidence within the Canadian 
varsity population. As a result, the first aim of my thesis was to quantify and create an 
injury profile within the varsity population in Canada, specifically in the province of 
Ontario. 
Furthermore, researchers have noted a variety of risk factors that promote 
swimming-related injuries but more general influences such as training patterns have not 
been considered. Specifically, knowledge of how factors, such as the age an athlete was 
first introduced to the sport and whether they took extended breaks from training, affect 
injury risk would provide useful information for long-term athlete development 
programs. Therefore, another aim of the thesis was to identify training-related risk factors 
which may predispose athletes to injury. 
It is important to remember that injury is a psychosocial as well as a physical 
event (Eklund & Bianco, 2004). Once an athlete gets injured his or her interaction with 
the environment and significant others changes. For instance, athletes start interacting 
with the medical team. As the injury experience is multifactorial, athletic injury 
rehabilitation program should not be solely aimed on the physical aspect of the injury, but 
rather on the interaction of the physical injury, athletic emotional response to that injury, 
and the personal interaction of the injured athletes with significant others in their life at 
the time (such as the coach, medical team, family and friends). Study Two explores these 
interactions using qualitative interview methods. 
13 
The purpose of this thesis was to better understand the complexity of the injury 
experience process on individual and social levels. Overall, this research improves 
overall understanding of the injury patterns within the Canadian swimming varsity 
population, and its effect on athletes' experiences with significant others during the 
process of recovery. 
14 
MANUSCRIPT 1 
Identifying Risk Factors for Swimming-Related 
Injuries over a Varsity Swimming Season 
Alisa Abgarov, Jessica Fraser-Thomas and Joseph Baker 
For simplicity the manuscript references are included at the end of the thesis. 
15 
Abstract 
Background: Research on swimming has largely explored injuries from the perspective of 
understanding how factors such as type of stroke, biomechanics of the swimming motion, 
and breathing side affect risk of swimming-related injuries. While these risk factors 
extended the understanding of injury risk, other more general influences such as training 
patterns have not been considered. Specifically, knowledge of how such factors as the 
age an athlete was first introduced to the sport and whether they took extended breaks 
from training affect injury risk would provide useful information for long-term athlete 
development programs. 
Objectives: To identify injury trends within a varsity swimming sample, provide a 
descriptive profile of varsity swimmers' injuries over the course of one season, and 
identify training-related risk factors associated with swimming injuries. 
Participants: 170 Ontario Varsity swimmers competing in the 2007-08 season. 
Design: Participants completed a retrospective survey of injury history. Descriptive 
analyses identified injury trends during and prior to the start of the season. Logistic 
regression assessed risk factors in swimmers who incurred new injuries in the 2007-08 
season (n=93). Independent variables included in the models were gender, age started 
competitive swimming, years of competitive swimming, swimming related injury history, 
and time off from competitive swimming. 
Results: Descriptive statistics quantified a high number of injuries among the varsity 
population, most commonly in the shoulder. Athletes also detailed extensive histories of 
past injuries, with higher prevalence among males. Logistic regression analyses revealed 
16 
that starting age for competitive swimming, whether the athlete took time off from the 
sport, and whether they had a history of swimming-related injury prior to the season were 
significant predictors for sustaining a new injury in the 2007-2008 season. 
Conclusion: Findings highlight extensive injury histories, high prevalence of injury in 
varsity swimmers, and significant risk factors associated with new injury occurrence. 
This information may be useful for preventing or reducing the severity of injuries in 
varsity swimmers. 
17 
Introduction 
The Sporting Goods Manufacturers Association (SGMA, 2008) estimates that 
there are more than 18 million fitness and competitive swimmers in the United States. 
Although swimming is commonly assumed to be a sport with low risk of injury, nearly 
75% of age group and developmental swimmers experience an injury at some point in 
their career (McMaster, 1996). Shoulder pain is the most common musculo-skeletal 
complaint in competitive swimmers (Brushoj, Bak, Johannse, & Fauno, 2007). A British 
survey found that 67% of swimmers suffer from shoulder pain at some point in their 
development (Pollard, 2001) and that prevalence increases with age and time in the sport 
(McMaster, 1999; McMaster, & Troup, 1993). In addition to shoulder injuries, other 
common sites are the knee (Fowler & Regan 1986; Sallis, Jones, Sunshine, Smith, & 
Simon, 2001), ankle (Wolf, Ebinger, Lawler, & Britton 2009), neck/back (Wolf et al., 
2009), groin (Grote, Lincoln, & Gamble, 2004), and elbow (Fowler, & Regan 1986; 
Magra, Caine, & Mafulli 2007) 
Several studies have reported training-related risk factors for such injuries such as 
frequency and intensity of training (Kennedy,Hawkins, & Krissoff 1978; McMaster, 
1996). However, no studies, to our knowledge, have considered risk factors for injuries 
among varsity swimmers. Due to the unique constraints of the university/college 
swimming season (e.g., short competitive season of 6-7 months, high level of training 
while pursing a full-time academic career), varsity swimmers may demonstrate a distinct 
injury profile. The purpose of this study was to identify current injury trends within the 
Canadian Ontario varsity swimming population, provide a descriptive profile of varsity 
18 
swimmers' injuries over the course of one season, and identify training-related risk 
factors associated with swimming injuries. We hypothesized that factors related to 
athletes' training history (such as previous injuries and/or taking time off from 
swimming) would positively predict occurrence of a new injury during the current (2007-
2008) competitive season. 
Methods 
Participants 
Using university websites, a comprehensive roster of 13 university varsity teams 
in the Ontario University Athletics Association (OUA) identified 368 varsity athletes for 
the 2007-2008 swimming season; 289 of these athletes participated in the final 
championship swimming meet in February 2008, where data were collected. At that 
meet 170 athletes (58.8%; n=92 females, n=78 males) agreed to participate in the study. 
Data Collection 
Prior to data collection, university ethics approval was granted and participants 
provided informed consent. Swimmers completed a 10-minute questionnaire on the pool 
deck at the OUA championships or online during the same week. The questionnaire 
focused on: (a) demographic information including age in years and gender (male or 
female), (b) swimming history including years in competitive swimming, starting age in 
competitive swimming, and time off from competitive swimming (not including end of 
season recovery), (c) injury profile including details of injuries before the 2007-2008 
season (i.e., location of injury, age first occurred, age healed - if applicable), details on 
new injuries incurred during the 2007-2008 season, re-occurrence of previous injuries 
19 
during the 2007-2008 season, injuries experienced during the OUA championships, and 
ongoing injuries at the end of the 2007-2008 season. 
Analyses 
Descriptive statistics were used to examine athletes' demographic background, 
swimming history, injury history, and specific details on their injuries. A multiple logistic 
regression analysis was used to calculate the odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence 
interval (CI) for athletes who incurred new injuries during the swimming season (n=93). 
Athletes with unhealed injuries at the start of the season were excluded from these 
analyses. Appendix C presents a flow diagram outlining sample selection for the logistic 
regression analysis. Using the backward stepwise Wald method, results for both the full 
and parsimonious models were obtained. All analyses were performed using SPSS 15.0. 
The full model included three independent categorical variables: (a) gender 
(male/female), (b) whether athletes took time off from competitive swimming (yes/no), 
and (c) whether athletes had a history of swimming related injury before the start of the 
season (yes/no). The full model also included two continuous variables: (a) time in 
competitive swimming in years and (b) start age of competitive swimming in years. The 
outcome variable was whether athletes incurred a new swimming related injury during 
the season (yes/no). The parsimonious model included all the variables mentioned above 
with the exclusion of gender and years in competitive swimming. These variables were 
dropped from the model through a step by step backward Wald logistic regression. The 
analysis was stopped once the present parsimonious model was reached, as it was found 
20 
to be the most conservative representation of the significant exposure variables while still 
maintaining the model significance. 
In addition to these models, additional analyses were performed to consider 
interactions among the five independent variables as they related to the outcome variable 
(i.e., incurring a new injury during the 2007-2008 season). Based on the gender-related 
results of this analysis, the full model was split to construct male-only (n=49) and female-
only (n=44) models. These models included all the variables of the original full model 
with the exclusion of gender. 
Results 
Forty-six percent (n=78) of participants were male, and fifty-four percent (n=92) 
were female. Mean age of the participants was 20.64 years (Standard Deviation (SD) 
=1.76), with no significant difference in age between male and female swimmers. The 
mean age swimmers reported starting competitive swimming was 10.27 years (SD=3.50) 
and they reported being involved in competitive swimming for a mean of 10.36 years 
(SD=3.70). Forty-five percent of athletes (n=75) took some time off from swimming and 
the mean age at which this occurred was 16.52 years (SD=2.61). Thirty nine percent 
(38.67%) of the athletes (n=29) took a break of less than 1 year, 24.00% (n=18) took a 
break of 1-2 years, 21.33% (n=16) took a break of 2-3 years, and 16.00% (n=12) took a 
break from swimming lasting more than 3 years. In addition, our data revealed that 
participants began their competitive career at 10.27 years of age (SD= 3.50) and started 
experiencing injuries within 6 years of their start, at which point many began to take time 
off from the sport and/or exhibit swimming-related injuries. 
21 
Appendix D provides general and gender specific descriptive results of the 
logistic regression analysis variables. Results of the independent sample t-tests 
(Appendix E) revealed no gender differences on the analyzed variables. 
Other descriptive statistics are provided in Figures 1 through 4. Figure 1 presents 
prevalence of injury onset by age and highlights that shoulders were the most common 
injury site for swimmers, that the onset of shoulder injuries peaked at ages 15 and 19, and 
that onset of shoulder and knee injury occurred at an earlier age than other injuries. Male 
and female data are presented together, as gender differences were not observed in injury 
locations or time of onset. 
Figure 2 outlines injury trends during the 2007-2008 varsity season. While 
61.90% (n=l 05) of respondents reported a history of swimming-related injury prior to the 
start of the 2007-2008 swimming season, 70.00% of the total sample (n=l 19) had a 
history of injury at the end of the season, indicating an increase of 8.10% within one 
swimming season. Further, 44.12% reported that they had at least one swimming-related 
injury at the start of the season, 34.12% reported incurring at least one new injury during 
the season, 52.94% reported that they had at least one swimming-related injury during the 
season, and 35.88% of athletes were injured while competing in the OUA championship 
meet. Collectively, these findings suggest a high proportion of athletes persisted in 
swimming throughout the course of their injuries. 
Figure 3 combines the data presented in Figures 1 and 2 to show the distribution 
of injury locations before and during the 2007-2008 varsity season. When looking at the 
athletes' injury profiles we observed that shoulder injuries were the most dominant 
22 
injury, followed by neck/back and knee. Furthermore, we observed trends indicating that 
shoulder injuries increased over the season, knee injuries remained unchanged, while 
back/neck injuries decreased. Figure 4 shows the injury duration by gender and highlights 
that females had a much higher rate of unhealed injuries compared to males. 
Table 1 presents the results of the multiple logistic regression analyses predicting 
risk of new injury in the 2007-2008 season. Results indicate that the full model was 
statistically significant (x2 (5df) = 12.16 p=0.03), and that swimmers who had taken time 
off from swimming were 4.46 (95%CI: 1.42-14.06) times more likely to sustain a new 
injury during the 2007-2008 varsity swimming season. The parsimonious model was also 
significant (x2 (3df) = 10.83, p=0.01), and the model also indicated that swimmers who 
took time off from swimming were 3.98 (95%CI: 1.32-11.96) times more likely to sustain 
a new injury during the swimming season. Further, the parsimonious model indicated that 
for every year later that an athlete started swimming, he/she was 13% (95%CI: 0.75-0.99) 
less likely to sustain an injury. 
The gender-specific analyses also revealed interesting results. While the male 
model was statistically significant (x2 (4df) =13.75,/?=0.01), the female model was not 
(X2 (3df) = 3.26,p=0.5\). Analysis of the male model indicated that for every year later a 
male athlete started swimming, he was 18.99% (95%CI: 0.67-0.98) less likely to sustain 
an injury. Further, male athletes who took time off from swimming were 8.16 (95%CI: 
1.24-53.97) times more likely to sustain a new injury. In addition, male swimmers with a 
history of swimming related injury were 7.19 (95%CI: 1.37-37.78) times more likely to 
sustain a new swimming related injury during the 2007-2008 season. 
23 
Discussion 
The purpose of this study was to identify current injury trends within a varsity 
swimming sample, provide a descriptive profile of varsity swimmers' injuries over the 
course of one season, and identify training-related risk factors associated with swimming 
injuries. Results reinforce past findings (McMaster, & Troup 1993; Rovere, & Nichols 
1985) suggesting a high number of swimming-related injuries. Findings also reinforce the 
notion that shoulders are the most common injury site, followed by the knees and 
neck/back. While results support past findings, the number of injured athletes currently 
competing at the varsity level in Canada is concerning. Coaches and swimming 
associations should re-evaluate their programs given the incidence of injury and the 
finding that injury rates increase within the season. It is possible that current training 
programs are not appropriate for swimmers who have a history of injuries or existing 
injuries. Further, it is important to stimulate research in the treatment and prevention of 
such injuries to ensure athletes' positive sport experiences in the sport. 
This study also found that the onset of shoulder and knee injuries was earlier than 
other reported injuries. This information may prove to be valuable in facilitating better 
understanding of these injuries. As such, we urge further research to examine the timeline 
of athletes' injuries across their careers. Such research could help coaches and 
practitioners prevent injuries in higher risk periods during athlete development. 
Generally, swimming programs encourage athletes to join at an early age and 
engage in a large volume of training on a year round basis. Therefore, swimming is 
generally perceived and defined as a sport where participants specialize early (Heinonen, 
24 
2007; Stacker, 1994). Results of the logistic regression analysis found that the earlier 
males started swimming, the greater their risk of acquiring a swimming-related injury, 
thus supporting the notion that an early start in the sport (i.e., early specialization) 
predisposes male athletes to more injuries during their swimming careers. 
The results showing a negative effect for taking time off from the sport were 
counterintuitive. We expected that taking time off from the sport would reduce injury 
risk, possibly by facilitating recovery from staleness or burnout, or by allowing 
recuperation from injuries. Instead we observed an increased risk of injury. It is possible 
that athletes who took time off placed unrealistic expectations on themselves once they 
returned to sport in attempts to make up for lost time and/or to 'catch up' to familiar 
athletes who may have surpassed them in skill. This attitude would increase the risk of 
injury but would be congruent with current models of skill acquisition (Ericsson, 
Krampe, & Tesch, 1993), which reinforce the idea that time off from the sport puts an 
athlete behind with regards to their development. It is also possible that athletes who took 
time of from the sport were more severely injured compared to other athletes, and were 
required to stop swimming, and as such, were more susceptible to re-injury when they 
returned to the sport after recovery. 
A recent cohort study of collegiate athletes identified a statistically (but not 
clinically) significant difference in swimming injuries in female swimmers compared to 
males (Sallis, Jones, et al., 2001). Our study did not find any observable differences in 
injuries profiles across genders such as different injury locations, and different age of 
injury onset, although we found that females were less likely to report recovery from 
25 
their injuries compared to their male counterparts. Sallis et al. (2001) speculated that the 
higher incidence of female shoulder injuries in their sample resulted from a more 
rigorous training philosophy of the coach towards female swimmers. We speculate that 
our female sample had a greater tendency to persevere through their injuries and keep 
participating even though they were injured, but further work is required to determine the 
legitimacy of this claim. Other factors such as higher sensitivity and / or awareness to 
injuries may lead females to perceive a longer recovery period compared males. In 
addition, males may be underplaying their injuries as compared to females and reporting 
that injuries are healed when they are in fact are still present. As such, it is important 
future research to incorporate different sources of injury information in order to better 
understand the severity and etiology of athletes' injuries. 
Although there were no observable differences in injury profiles between the 
gender groups, results of the gender specific regression analysis revealed differences in 
predicting injury outcomes. Specifically, findings showed that males were at higher risk 
of acquiring new swimming-related injuries if they started swimming early, took time off 
from swimming, and if they have a history of swimming-related injury. Future research is 
essential in increasing the body of knowledge around gender differences and risk of 
injury. 
Finally, in recruiting our participants, we could not help but observe that 21% 
(n=79) of swimmers did not finish their 2007-2008 varsity season. Further investigation 
is needed to understand the reason behind this and determine whether injuries played any 
role in their withdrawal. It is important to understand why athletes discontinue their 
26 
involvement in a sport since participation can have positive effects on health, life 
satisfaction, and stress, all important factors in the life of a collegiate student. 
Some key limitations and areas for future research should be highlighted. First, 
the study used self-reported data, therefore variables were subject to response bias. 
Furthermore, data were retrospective in nature and future studies should use prospective 
data collection methods throughout a competitive season to verify the present results. In 
addition, athletes who dropped out during the 2007-2008 season did not complete the 
questionnaire. In this study, it was not possible to recruit dropout athletes and discover 
their reasons for dropping out, as these athletes were not present at the championship 
meet and coaches did not forward the questionnaire to these athletes. It is possible that 
athletes who dropped out stopped swimming as a result of injury, which may have 
resulted in under representation of injury in this sample. Future studies could also utilize 
coaches and medical staff to better define and evaluate athletes' injuries, leading to more 
precise injury diagnoses and measures of severity. The inclusion of this information 
would add a level of sophistication to the available data analyses. Finally, while the high 
response rate (59%) was impressive, a larger sample would allow for more in-depth 
analyses, such as sub-categorizations of independent variables (i.e., gender). 
In conclusion, our findings highlight how prevalent swimming injuries are in the 
varsity swimming community. Coaches should be particularly aware of athletes who have 
sustained past injuries or had a break from the sport, as they are more likely to acquire 
new injuries. Care should be taken to tailor programs to address athletes' personal needs 
and assist them to have an injury free swimming experience. Although this work provides 
27 
a useful starting point for understanding the unique constraints of varsity swimmers, 
additional work is important for the adequate treatment and prevention of injury in this 
population. 
28 
Table 1.1 Odds Ratios and 95% Confidence Intervals for Occurrence of New Injury 
During the 2007/08 Varsity Swimming Season. 
Results of the multiple logistic regression analyses predicting risk of new injury in the 
2007-2008 season: Odds ratios and 95% confidence for the fully loaded model, a 
parsimonious model, and two gender-specific models. 
EXPOSURE VARIABLES 
GENDER 
AGE STARTED 
COMPETITIVE SWIMMING 
YEARS SWIMMING 
TOOK TIME OFF 
FROM SWIMMING 
INJURY HISTORY BEFORE 
START OF SEASON 
MODEL CHI SQUARE FULLY LOADED 
MODEL 
OR 
1.77 
0.87 
0.97 95% CI 
(0.60-5.26) 
(0.76-1.01) 
(0.84-1.12) 
•ffiffl (1.42-14.06) 
2.1 (0.71 - 6.20) 
12.161 (5d.f.) p=0.033 PARSIMONIOUS 
MODEL 
OR 
• 
BRl 
• 
iJIsiiwf 
2.04 95% CI 
-
(0.75-0.99) 
-
(132-11.96) 
(0.70-5.95) 
10.835 (3d.f.)p=0.013 MALE 
MODEL 
OR 
-
Hip 
0.89 95% CI 
• 
(0.67- 0.98) 
(0.68-1.17) 
: 124-53.97) 
(137-37.78) 
13.755 (4d.f.)p=0.008 FEMALE 
MODEL 
OR 
• 
0.93 
1.02 
4.13 
0.52 95% CI 
-
(0.69-1.26) 
(0.85-1.23) 
(0.70-24.36) 
(0.08-3.15) 
3.261 (3d.f.) p=0.515 
29 
Figure 1.1: Prevalence of Injury Onset by Age for Each Injury Location as Reported 
by the Athletes. 
1 0) 
Xt 
E 3 
Z 
(A 0) 
I 
XI 
£ 
3 
z 
w .2 'C 
3 
JT 
o 1-
0> X! 
£ 
3 
z 0> 
•I 
Xt 
E 
3 
z Shoulder 
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 Athletes'Age 
30 
25 
20 
15 
10 -
5 
0 
30 
25 
20 
15 
10 
5 
0 
30 
25 
20 
15 
10 
5 
0 Knee J—i—i—i—t—1_ 
10 11 12 13 14 15 18 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 Athletes'Age 
Elbow 
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 Athletes'Age 
Ankle 
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 Athletes'Age 
30 
Figure 1.1: Cont'd 
« tt> 
5 •—% £ >*-o u. 
Jo 
E i3 
z 
» 
« •= 
3 ••>-» 
£ t-
o kn 
jjj 
E 3 
Z 
(A 
0) 
•c 
3 
Inj >•-o 
a> 
E 3 
z 30 
25 
20 
15 
10 
<> 
0 
30 
?S 
20 
15 
10 
5 
0 
30 
25 
20 
15 
10 
5 
0 Back/Neck 
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 Athletes'Age 
Groin 
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 Athletes'Age 
Other • * < t * —j * i 
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 Athletes'Age 
* Note. Other includes concussion, nose, ear, forearm, wrist, ribs, and foot. 
31 
Figure 1.2: Prevalence of Injury during the 2007/08 Varsity Season 
History of Injury 
at the Start of 
the Season Injury at the Start 
of the Season Incurred New 
Injury During 
the Season Injury Presence 
During the 
Season Injury Presence 
During the 
Championship History of Injury 
at the End of the 
Season 
32 
Figure 1.3: Distribution of Injury Location before and during the 2007/08 Varsity Season 
N= 205 N= 65 N = 71 
History of Injury Injury at Start of the Season Injury During Season 
33 
Figure 1.4: Injury Duration by Gender 
80 
70 
$ 60 
I 50 
| 40 
| 30 
I 20 z 10 
s. •s ffl 8 <1-1 Year 2- 3 Years 4-5 Years Unhealed 
34 
MANUSCRIPT 2 
Injury in Varsity Swimmers: Exploring Athletes' Rehabilitation Experiences 
Alisa Abgarov, Jessica Fraser-Thomas and Joseph Baker 
For simplicity the manuscript references are included at the end of the thesis. 
35 
Abstract 
Swimming is one of the most popular sports worldwide, yet is associated with 
significant injury rates (e.g., McMaster, 1993). Previous work suggests that many 
swimmers train through injuries (Abgarov, Fraser-Thomas, & Baker, 2009), and return to 
sport following injury can be stressful and emotional (Tracy, 2003). The purpose of this 
study was to gain understanding of varsity athletes' experiences going through injury 
rehabilitation for a microtraumatic injury. Twelve varsity swimmers who experienced 
swimming-related injury or pain during the past three years were purposefully sampled to 
capture diverse experiences (i.e., mixed genders of different ages, from different varsity 
swim teams and age group swim teams in two provinces). Participants completed a 
demographic questionnaire and engaged in a semi-structured interview focusing on 
general experiences with injuries, relationships with significant others during injuries, 
and strategies to cope with injuries. Content analysis followed previously established 
guidelines (Tesch, 1990). Results revealed athletes experienced varied injury paths, 
consequently leading to different interactions with significant others (i.e., coaches, 
family, friends, medical team), mixed emotional experiences (e.g., anger, mistrust, 
motivation, appreciation) and different coping strategies (e.g., training through injuries, 
take time off, isolation, working with the medical team). Findings are discussed in the 
context of advancing our understanding of the psychological impact of injury on athlete 
development. Practical implications for athletes, coaches, and support staff are also 
discussed. 
36 
Introduction 
In 2008 it was estimated that there were more than 18 million fitness and 
competitive swimmers in the United States (SMGA, 2008). Unfortunately, many of these 
individuals experienced swimming related injuries as a result of their participation. For 
example, research by McMaster (1996) revealed that nearly 75% of age group and 
developmental swimmers experienced an injury at some point in their swimming career. 
For those who take time off for recovery from injury, return to sport following injury can 
be stressful and emotional experience (Tracy, 2003). Emotions such as depression, anger, 
fear, tension, disgust, anxiety, and panic have been shown to create psychophysiological 
reactions that contribute to increased sensations of injury pain (Quackenbush, 1994). 
Nevertheless, literature supports the notion that sport participation has a positive overall 
influence on athletes' health and development. More specifically, it has been proposed 
that sport can promote individuals to have healthy, satisfying, and productive lives 
(Hamilton, 2004) by facilitating their physical, psychological, social, and intellectual 
development (Fraser-Thomas, Cote & Deakin, 2005). 
Investigation of previous research reveals gaps in the literature examining 
athletes' injury experiences. While some researchers have considered athletes' return to 
sport following serious acute injuries (Podlog & Eklund, 2006), little work has addressed 
their return to sport following gradual onset injuries. In particular, there is speculation 
that many athletes train through microtraumatic injuries (Flint, 1998). The etiology of 
microtraumatic injuries is distinct when compared to macrotraumatic injuries 
(Leaderbetter, 1992). With microtraumatic injuries, it is likely that athletes sustained their 
37 
injury over a period of weeks or even months, with gradual increase in pain and decrease 
of performance. These athletes likely experienced the sport injury in a different manner 
than athletes who received an acute injury such as broken arm. 
Common experiences during the injury process are feelings of separation, 
loneliness, guilt and a loss of identity and independence, because athletes feel that they 
are no longer vitally contributing to the team and they are reliant upon others in the 
rehabilitative process (Lewis-Griffith, 1982). Coping and the way in which athletes adapt 
to stressful events, such as an injury, is an important line of inquiry to further understand 
the nuances of long-term athlete development. Previous research has suggested that 
coping strategies may be broadly classified as either problem focused or emotion focused 
(Folkman & Lazarus, 1980). Problem focused strategies are task focused whereas 
emotion focused strategies are employed to regulate and manage cognitive distress. Other 
coping strategies could be denial avoidance, repression, and the use of drugs (Crocker, 
Kowalski, & Graham 1998) 
Having adequate social support seems critical for coping with being injured and 
recovering from an injury (Udry, 1997) and has been identified as an important factor 
affecting athletes' beliefs about the value of rehabilitation (Bricker, 2006). Social support 
can come from family, friends, coaches, sport-psychology professionals, as well as from 
the therapist performing the rehabilitation (Bricker, 2006). If athletes perceive a high 
level of social support from their athletic trainer, this could maximize the effectiveness of 
their rehabilitation process (Bricker, 2006). Athletic therapists play an important role in 
athletes' rehabilitation process as the social support offered by athletic trainers helps 
38 
athletes acquire stronger beliefs about their capacity to successfully overcome and 
recover from their injuries (Bricker, 2006) 
Furthermore, coaches are present throughout athletes' injury process and play 
many roles. Podlog (2007) discussed the importance of coaches throughout athletes' 
injury experiences. He suggested that professional coaches possess a good understanding 
of athletes' experiences and perceptions of the return to sport following an injury. 
However, it is not always clear whether coaches actually practice these 
recommendations. Furthermore, in order to fully recover from injury, athletes need to 
undergo psychological rehabilitation in conjunction to their physical rehabilitation. 
Optimal recovery from sports injuries is thought to be related to the degree of compliance 
with prescribed rehabilitation regimens (Brewer,Van Raalte, Cornelius, & Petitpas 2000; 
Smith, Scott, O'Fallon, & Young, 1990; Taylor & Taylor,1997). Athletes' program 
adherence might be affected by scheduling, as well as environmental and personal 
conditions such as pain and self-motivation (Taylor & May, 1996). 
Collectively, past findings highlight a need for further investigation of the 
psychology of microtraumatic injury. Moveover, to our knowledge, no studies have 
examined injury experiences among varsity swimmers. This population is of particular 
interest due to the particular constraints of the university/college swimming season, such 
as the short competitive season of 6-7 months, as well as the high level of training while 
pursing a full-time academic career. Previous research on rehabilitation may not fully 
encapsulate the experiences of this group. As such, the purpose of this study was to gain 
39 
understanding of varsity athletes' experiences going through rehabilitation for 
microtraumatic injury. 
Methods 
The research protocol has been reviewed and approved by the Human Participants 
Subcommittee (HPRC) of York University. All participants provided informed consent. 
Participants 
Participants were recruited through involvement in a previous study of 
swimming-related injuries (Abgarov, Fraser-Thomas, & Baker, 2009) and/or through the 
primary investigator's personal contacts in the swimming community in Canada. 
Participants were purposefully sampled (Patton, 2002) to capture diverse experiences 
(i.e., mixed genders of different ages, from different varsity swim teams and age group 
swim teams in two provinces). Participants were swimmers who sustained a swimming-
related injury and/or experienced chronic swimming-related joint pain during their varsity 
swimming participation. Specifically, participants were screened based on the following 
criteria: (a) currently swimming at the varsity level in Canada or recently graduated from 
a Canadian university where they swam varsity, and (b) experienced swimming-related 
microtraumatic injury or pain within the past 3 years. 
Data Collection 
Prior to data collection, participants read and signed the informed consent form 
(Appendix F), and completed a short quantitative questionnaire to identify background 
information and eligibility screening (Appendix G). Participants then engaged in a 45-90 
minute in-depth semi-structured interview with the primary researcher. This semi-
40 
structured format allowed the researcher to discuss interview questions, but also to have 
the freedom to pursue themes and issues not covered in the interview guide. The 
interview questions focused on the following areas: (a) past injuries or pain, (b) 
experiences during the injury rehabilitation process, (c) relationships with others during 
the rehabilitation process (e.g., coach, medical team), (d) coping strategies and key 
decisions throughout the injury process (e.g., taking time off), (e) current physical 
activity participation. Appendix H presents the full interview guide. All interviews were 
conducted face to face in a quiet comfortable environment chosen by the participant. 
Interviews were digitally recorded and transcribed verbatim. Once transcription was 
complete, participants were asked to review their transcripts for verification, and were 
given the opportunity to add, delete, or rephrase their responses to assure that responses 
reflected their intended communications. 
The trustworthiness of the data collection and analysis was assured through a 
number of means. First, the preliminary quantitative questionnaire provided important 
background information that offered the primary researcher some context when asking 
interview questions. Second, several probing questions were used throughout the 
interview to provide the participant every opportunity to clearly communicate his/her 
meaning. Sample probes included: "Why?" "How did that happen?" "How did you feel 
about X?" "What do you mean by X?" Third, as outlined above, participants had the 
opportunity to review their transcripts to assure they reflected their intended 
communications. Fourth, we chose a maximum of a 3 years interval since the occurrence 
of the injury, in order to reduce the effects of forgetting and biasing the experience in the 
41 
long-term memory. Past research in regard to recall of sport experience found that a two-
year window provided effective recall of experiences (Beamer, Cote, & Ericsson, 1999), 
where as reliability of information after four or five years was relatively low (~ r=0.4) 
(Ropponen, Levalathti, Simonen, Videman, & Battie, 2001). Finally, in the analysis 
phase, the consistency of the meaning units was verified in a random sample of meaning 
units, where two independent researchers assigned themes and categories to the selected 
meaning units. Inter-rater reliability was very high at 88%. 
Data Analysis 
The data underwent interpretational qualitative analysis (Cote, Salmela, Baria, & 
Russell, 1993; Tesch, 1990). The primary researcher read and reread the transcripts in 
order to become familiar with the data. Once the primary researcher was familiar and 
comfortable with the data, she worked with a fellow researcher, experienced in 
qualitative data analysis, to use open coding to identify meaningful units of information 
within the data, and apply tags to those segments of data. The selected tags were then 
discussed between the researchers in order to assure that tags adequately described the 
data segments, and these discussions led to some re-analysis as appropriate. Finally, 
categories were created and appropriate tags were grouped together. Again, categories 
were collaboratively determined by the primary researcher and a more experienced 
researcher to assure the most appropriate selections were made. 
Other Considerations 
The insider role of the primary investigator should also be noted, as this could 
affect the research. I am a competitive swimmer who has been part of the swimming 
42 
community for almost 20 years. In addition I swam on an Ontario varsity team for three 
years where I sustained an injury which caused me to withdraw from the team. Currently 
I am a masters swimming coach with three masters clubs and one triathlon club. As a 
novice qualitative researcher, I could have created predispositions, selective perceptions, 
and / or biases which could have affected the results of the study. 
It is also important to note that this study focused only on the athletes' injury 
experiences; however, when athletes get injured they are part of a larger system which 
includes their teamates, coaches, assistant coaches, health care providers, family and 
friends. All of these individuals have their own perceptions of the athletes' injuries and 
sport participation, and the culture of team and sport community values may affect the 
perceptions of the injured athletes regarding his experiences. However, our results 
present only the athletes' perceptions and interpretations of their injury experiences. 
Results and Discussion 
Athletes' Injury Paths 
Twelve participants shared their injury experiences during their varsity swimming 
careers. Most of the participants incurred more than one swimming-related injury during 
their swimming career. Appendix J presents supplementary tables of the volume of 
training that athletes engaged in throughout their swimming careers and plots of injury 
onset timelines. Table 2.1 presents participants' age, gender, location of injuries 
experienced prior to varsity, location of injuries experienced during varsity, significant 
others athletes interacted with throughout varsity injury experiences, injury status at the 
43 
time of data collection, and participation status at time of data collection. Results 
revealed that all the participants in the study had a wide variety of swimming 
backgrounds with distinct injury profiles. As such, they experienced varying injury 
rehabilitation paths. Different injury paths consequently led to different interactions with 
significant others, different emotional effects on injured athletes, and different coping 
strategies. 
Understanding Athletes' Relations with Others During the Injury Process 
Table 2.2 summarizes athletes' interactions and experiences with prominent 
figures in their lives throughout the injury process. Figures 2.2.a through 2.2.e summarize 
the emotional reactions and judgments of athletes in relation to their interactions and 
experiences with significant others. 
Interactions and experiences with coaches and assistant coaches. Athletes 
discussed mixed interactions and experiences with coaches and assistant coaches, and 
consequently, very mixed emotions and judgments related to these interactions and 
experiences. 
a) Failure to report pain/injury to coaches. Athletes tended to evaluate their level 
of the pain before approaching the coach. For example, athletes mentioned that they 
wanted to make sure that the pain they felt was legitimate and the result of injury rather 
than simply soreness resulting from training or bad habits such as sleeping in a strange 
position: "I would have to make sure that it was actually legitimate pain and then I would 
let them [coaches] know" (Participant #5; P-5). Others just wanted to make sure that the 
44 
pain was permanent before reporting it: "I didn't tell [coach] when it started hurting, but I 
told him after [a few workouts later]" (P-l 1). 
At times, athletes lost perception of the amount pain required before allowing 
themselves to approach the coach. At other times there was an agreement between the 
coach and the athlete to discuss pain if it occurred, but athletes still prolonged their 
evaluation period prior to reporting the pain to their coach. Once athletes realized they 
should approach the coach regarding their injury, they usually chose to report the injury 
objectively to their coaches, without mentioning the emotional effect that their injury had 
on them. 
In sum, these results suggest that athletes had hard time dealing with their injury 
situation. Of particular interest is that athletes did not discuss the emotions related to their 
injuries, even though they were experiencing feelings of anger, fear, sadness and 
frustration. 
b) Poor communication between athletes and coaches. Our data show that there 
was not always good communication between the athlete and coach, and as a result, 
athletes sometimes perceived events differently than their coaches. Below are some 
examples of this poor communication, and the emotional effect it had on injured athletes. 
Some athletes assumed that the coach already knew what was going on with them, 
and what their needs were. 
I think that they [coaches] could usually tell, without you telling them [about the 
pain of the injury]. It's all about body language. They can tell you are frustrated. 
If you are frustrated you usually pick it up, which makes sense. I mean, if you are 
mad you can tell the person is mad. (P-6) 
45 
Other athletes felt that they could not communicate their emotions and feelings 
regarding their injuries to their coaches, as they would not understand them. Sometimes 
this was because athletes admired and respected their coaches and felt that they would be 
a disappointment to the coach by not pushing through their injuries. 
P-8: He [coach] knew that my shoulder was messed up, but I think that I had to 
swim or I was letting him down, letting myself down kind of a feeling. 
Researcher: Were you able to discuss your emotions of the injury? 
P-8: I definitely wouldn't have broached any types of emotions as a coach with 
him, as his personality as compared to mine was very different, and I really didn't 
find him very supportive. Other than that aspect, he is a very hard driven hard 
working personality. As a swimmer I would look up to that and think that nothing 
would be in his way even though it was an injury. Or whether... He bikes to the 
pool and it's snowing out... From a determination stand point, I found that he 
would think that I was not trying hard enough, or working through it hard enough. 
I couldn't address how it would make me feel. I just focused on the pain more 
than the emotional aspect of it. 
Furthermore, one athlete expressed that she felt she could not discuss her injury 
with the coaches, as they were very busy people and she did not want to burden them 
further with her issues: "I guess I would probably share [my emotions] with them more, 
but I always felt that they were too busy. They had too much going on, and I didn't want 
to bother them." (P-l) 
Some athletes felt they were becoming distanced from their coach because of their 
injury, as coaches tended to close up and not address the injuries of the athletes. In such 
situations, tension and frustration developed between athletes and coaches, which 
resulted in feelings of not being understood, not being heard, and being frustrated. 
He didn't want to hear about it. He knew that I was injured and he wanted me to 
get over it, and I couldn't. There was a bit of frustration on both sides. So since 
my last season was very good, I was on the rise, and then I got injured and 
46 
stopped because of a stupid injury, and then there was frustration. And maybe he 
didn't know what to do with it. Maybe he didn't have that much experience with 
that kind of injury. (P-4) 
Furthermore, P-8 discussed how there was no concern relatiationship from her 
coach, which made her feel like she was disappointing him. She felt frustrated and as if 
she was being punished for being injured. 
His [coach's] reaction was to get in and kick, or swim with one arm, or he wanted 
me to sit on a bike and spin for 2 hours. As for being supportive, he was frustrated 
that I couldn't be training properly and for me it was pretty hard because I wanted 
to swim and it wasn't like I was trying to get out of swimming. I felt that there 
wasn't really that concerned relationship. It was more of an anger that I wasn't 
there. I felt frustrated because I wanted to swim. It wasn't like I didn't want to 
swim, and it was almost like being punished for being injured. That's how it felt 
to me. I understand now the whole physical fitness aspect of it, of wanting to keep 
in shape and, you know, you like get in the habit of getting up that early and the 
team comradery and every thing like that, but it was really frustrating, to just sit 
there [on the bike]. (P-8) 
In sum, these results reveal poor communication between athletes and their 
coaches. In many instances athletes did not know how to express their feelings to their 
coaches, and by the same token, coaches often lacked the knowledge and understanding 
to know how to deal with injured athletes and the overall situation at hand. Furthermore, 
this section highlights how athletes perceive the level of coaches' authority within the 
sport. 
c) Solid athlete-coach relationships. In contrast,,many athletes reported a special 
connection with their coaches within the sporting setting and several of the injured 
athletes expressed having open communication with their coaches: 
I will go and talk with my coach about stuff. I will go and say that it hurts and it 
sucks and I cannot do this, and he is, 'Okay' and 'That's fine'. We are pretty tight. 
He understands that when I tell him that it hurts, I will not lie to him and say 
'Look, it hurts' when it doesn't hurt. (P-6) 
47 
Similarly, others expressed that the coaches were 'there for them' and understood 
them, playing a more active role in helping them deal with their injuries: 
They understood the kind of person I was, very hard worker, and it kills me to not 
be able to do the work. So sometimes they had to help me hold myself back, 
because sometimes I would be my worst enemy. But they helped me to come 
back gradually. (P-5) 
I liked my other coach. I feel that we had a stronger connection with the other 
coach than my coach right now. He was the best coach. He would always listen. 
He is very understanding and would always go and give me a high five and that 
was what helped to keep going - that someone cared and someone notices that I 
worked really hard. He would always tell me. (P-7) 
Furthermore, one participant expressed that she had great communication with her 
coaches, and instead of controlling her injury experience, her coaches created an 
environment where she was in control of her training: 
My coaches understood. I mean there was nothing they could do. My coaches 
were a little like, they were not like club coaches that were hovering above you. 
You know, they were like, 'Do your own thing'. It's good. It's different but it's 
good cause they treat you more like an adult. You make your own decisions. I 
liked them giving the ideas, but sometimes they would say 'Why wouldn't you 
modify this?' Or 'Why won't you modify that?' But ultimately I had to take care 
of myself. Nobody could do that for me, cause nobody knows when it hurts. (P-l) 
These results reveal positive but very different interactions between athletes and 
coaches. In particular, results show athletes had a closeness with coaches, and open 
communication about their injuries and their emotional effects. Coaches showed 
understanding of the importance of giving personal attention to athletes during the injury 
process. Furthermore, they exhibited trust in their athletes to deal with their injuries and 
promoted feelings of responsibility and being in charge. Unfortunately, coaches 
providing athletes with independence in this situation left some athletes feeling mixed 
48 
emotions such as being supported by the coach, while feeling being burdened and 
challenged to modify their training and find means to overcome their injuries. 
d) Positive training-related experiences with coaches. Most athletes were given 
modifications to their workouts by their coaches, and some coaches worked with athletes 
to improve their training experiences throughout the injury process. 
It [injury] didn't affect how much I trained. I was talking to [coach] about it and 
we were analyzing why it happened. We were going through the whole 
biomechanics of the swimming stroke. So he was analyzing that when I get tired 
my shoulder drops a little bit, and that's when I feel the pain. So I fixed my entry 
and I fixed my catch and that's when it started to work well. (P-9) 
These interactions made athletes feel wanted, noticed, cared for, helped, heard, 
supported, and understood by their coaches. The personalized attention that coaches gave 
athletes led them to have much more positive experiences during their injury process. In 
particular, athletes appreciated coaches taking initiative and being actively involved in 
their injury rehabilitation, while working together with the athlete to find solutions. 
e) Negative training-related experiences with coaches. Unfortunately, many 
athletes did not have the same positive training experiences with their coaches. For 
example, one athlete felt that she was pushed too far by her coaches. 
Researcher: Did the coach change your workouts? 
P-l 1: A little bit. He let me do my physio exercises. 
Researcher: Okay, and if you had a hard set and you said that you cannot do it, 
what did he do? 
P-l 1: He'd tell me to try and if I'm not able, if I'm really really really not able to 
do it, I can stop. But only if I'm really not able to continue, and not just if I just 
feel pain. 
Researcher: So did you most of the time continue? 
49 
P-l 1: Yes I continued, until I cried, and then I got out [of the water]. [Tearful]. 
Researcher: How did you feel at that moment? 
P-l 1: Depressed. I was angry with the coach. 
Researcher: Why? 
P-l 1: Because he asked me to continue, even though I was not able to, and I don't 
feel like I can stop before I can get out of the pool with help. [I cannot get out of 
the pool on my own]. I feel like I cannot stop. He made me feel like, ehhm, if I 
don't have to go to the hospital, I don't feel the pain enough that I should stop. 
(P-ll) 
Other athletes felt they were unimportant and were overlooked by their coaches. 
For example, they may not have been given feedback on their technique while they were 
recovering from their injury. 
Sometimes I was doing the swimming set outside the water on the 'PASO 
Trainer' [land cord machine which works on athletes' underwater pull strength]. 
Maybe that was too much. I don't think I was doing it right [with that machine]. 
The coach was not always there to tell me 'Okay, look at this, look at that' and so 
maybe I did something wrong and it led to my first shoulder pain and injury. (P-4) 
In summary, the above results suggest the athletes had very mixed interactions 
and experiences with their coaches while injured, which led to varying emotional and 
judgmental reactions. Coaches are an integral part of athletic success; they can influence 
athletes' confidence levels, emotions, and perceptions through their expectations, 
behaviors, and interactions. Research has shown that coaches can have a significant 
positive impact on athletes' rehabilitation experience (Bianco, 2001; Gould, Udry, 
Bridges, & Beck 1997). For example, Gould et al., (1997) found that athletes believed 
that their injury recovery was facilitated by coaches' interest and assistance. Further, 
Bianco (2001) reported that social support from their coaches was important in providing 
50 
reassurance to athletes about getting better, as well as focusing on future opportunities 
and encouraging them to adhere to the injury rehabilitation program. 
The participants in our study expressed a great deal of trust in their coaches, but at 
times this trust was not accompanied with proper communication skills, leading to 
negative experiences between the athlete and the coach. As such, there is a need to ensure 
good communication skills between athletes and coaches in order to facilitate more 
positive injury rehabilitation experiences. Coaches were also perceived to be 
unapproachable by some athletes, and athletes expressed varying beliefs about coaches' 
perceptions of the athletic situation at hand. Unfortunately, past literature provides some 
support for the finding that athletes believed coaches wanted them to push through their 
injury. For example, a study by Nixon (1994) showed that many coaches feel 
ambivalence about issues of pain and injury. More specifically, he found that over 50% 
of the coaches strongly believed that athletes ought to push themselves to their physical 
limits. Ironically, these coaches also believed that athletes should not take excessive 
risks with their bodies. The risk-pain-injury paradox that coaches communicate to their 
athletes indirectly may contribute to the normalization of pain and injury perceptions of 
their athletes. (Young, White and McTeer, 1994) This coupled with low levels of 
communication between athletes and coaches may contribute to the negative experiences 
athletes have while they are injured. 
Athletes' interactions and experiences with physiotherapists, athletic therapists, 
and massage therapists. During the injury process, most athletes sought out or were 
referred to medical professionals. Participants in this study had a wide range of 
51 
experiences with medical staff, ranging from very supportive and helpful feelings to 
strong feelings of frustration. 
a) Positive experiences with therapists. Many athletes reported positive 
experiences with athletic therapists, physiotherapists, and massage therapists. They spoke 
of them being knowledgeable, feeling connections with them, and feeling understood and 
supported. 
So I had three different physiotherapists. They were all pretty good, not bad. 
Sometimes they didn't understand my frustration with doing the same exercises 
all the time, but in general they knew what they were doing. They were 
knowledgeable. I got to discuss it [the injury] with them, and they were generally 
pretty helpful. I asked them about what I should do and if I should take a break, if 
I should stop. They understood. The physiotherapist that I had, they understood 
being an athlete and how hard it would be to take a break, so they were good. 
They were supportive of me continuing thorough it. They told me when I was 
doing something when I should not be doing it. (P-l) 
b) Negative experiences with therapists. Some athletes did not enjoy the services 
of their physiotherapists/athletic therapists. They did not feel supported or cared for, or 
that they were competent: "I didn't like it. I found she [athletic therapist] was like not 
really interested in what she was doing. She just like did it to get it out of the way." (P-
10) 
c) Inconvenience, frustration, and monotony of the rehabilitation process. In 
general, most athletes referred to the physical treatment in the clinic as boring, 
inconvenient (it took to much time and was too expensive) and resulting in feelings of 
frustration. "I started seeing my physiotherapist less and less until I just didn't see him 
anymore, because I was too busy and I didn't have time to drive across town to see him. 
It took 3 hours every time." (P-7) 
52 
I didn't like it. I got annoyed with it [physiotherapy]. It just became frustrating 
continuously being in physio and constantly having pain flare up again. 
Sometimes you think things are getting better. It could be partly that I wasn't 
doing my exercises enough, but it was just frustrating always having to go back to 
physio. (P-l) 
d) Therapists provided messages that conflicted with other significant figures. 
At times, athletes received news from their physiotherapists / athletic therapists / massage 
therapists that encouraged them to slow down and take time off from their sport to let 
their injuries heal. When this occurred, athletes felt conflicted as their therapist suggested 
time off but their coach usually insisted they continue. As such, athletes felt frustrated 
and confused. They wanted to keep swimming to please their coaches, but they were still 
in pain. Fortunately, most of the time athletes found a compromise that was supported by 
both their coaches and their medical team. 
P-8: My physiotherapists were fairly good, They were very adamant about taking 
time off from swimming, and initially I didn't want to do that, because [coach] 
was pretty adamant about swimming right? They were pretty good. 
Researcher: Did you share your emotions with the physiotherapist? Did you 
discuss openly about your injury? 
P-8: Yeah, I think I fairly -1 pretty much did. I said that look, I want to swim. To 
me swimming was really, really, important at that time and I couldn't to get into 
my head that I had to stop, and I think that that was hard, and I think that they 
were very good in kinda pushing you a bit [to take the time off]. 
In sum, athletes had mixed relationships with physiotherapists/ athletic therapists / 
massage therapists. Some felt that they were cared for, understood and helped by them, 
while others felt that they unimportant in their eyes, or that they were being used. Such a 
variety of experiences coupled with tangible restrictions such as time and money made 
some athletes feel frustrated. In addition, athletes often expressed frustration because they 
53 
perceived the treatment as ineffective and unchallenging. These mixed results are 
somewhat troubling since optimal recovery from sports injuries is related to the degree of 
compliance with prescribed rehabilitation regimens (Brewer,Van Raalte, Cornelius & 
Petitpas, 2000; Smith, Scott, O'Fallon, & Young 1990; Taylor & Taylor, 1997). 
Psychosocial factors such as low motivation, psychological distress, and low social 
support are associated with poorer rehabilitation compliance (Brewer et al 2000; Byely, 
Worell, Gahimer, & Domholdt 1994). Furthermore, athletes who do not have confidence 
in rehabilitation programs are less likely to comply with programs, which would lead to 
reduced benefits (Taylor & May 1996). In order to facilitate a more positive rehabilitation 
experience, physiotherapists/ athletic therapists should possess stronger interpersonal 
skills to motivate athletes to remain in the rehabilitation program. Moreover, it is vital 
that programs be individually tailored to athletes' injury needs. Finally, it is important to 
ensure good coach-athlete-therapist communication through injury process so athletes 
experience less miscommunication and conflicting messages from their coaches and 
medical team. 
Athletes' interactions and experiences with chiropractors and acupuncturists. 
Participants also reported mixed interactions and experiences with chiropractors and 
acupuncturists. 
a) Chiropractors and acupuncturists were supportive and helpful. Several 
participants found treatments helpful and effective, and felt cared for by providers. "I did 
a bit of acupuncture, (....) it felt really better so I kept going with that for as long as I 
could (....) the guy seemed like he cared" (P-2). 
54 
b) Treatments were evasive and painful. Others found treatments were evasive 
and painful. Two participants (P-l and P-8) were scared of needles and had negative 
experiences with the acupuncturists. Furthermore, one participant found the chiropractic 
adjustment too painful and uncomfortable. 
I did it [chiropractic] once. I cried (....) I was like, "I will never do that again." It 
was just a horrifying experience, like him putting pins on, and then sitting on me 
moving my arm. I was like, " I don't like this." (P-l) 
c) Treatments were financially inaccessible. Because both chiropractors and 
acupuncturists are considered alternative to main stream medicine, participants 
mentioned that they were expensive, as they were not covered by the university insurance 
and therefore not always accessible. "He made me feel like he cared but it was too 
expensive for me. It wasn't covered by my insurance or anything" (P-2) 
Athletes' interactions and experiences with family. Athletes had mixed 
interactions and experiences with their family with regard to their injuries and sport 
participation, resulting in mixed emotions and judgments. 
a) Athletes felt supported by family. Some participants felt supported by their 
family during their injury experiences. 
P-l: I told my parents (....). I didn't keep it [emotions] to myself. I shared. 
Researcher: How did they react to it? 
P-l: They were you know, I guess disappointed, not in me but like at the situation. 
They sympathized with me. 
Researcher: And how did that make you feel? The way they responded? 
P-l: Well I felt that they were supporting me. 
55 
The data from P-l suggests that family members offered passive support in regard 
to their injuries. Parents' passive support and indirect involvement has been found to be a 
healthy form of parental influence in the later stages of athlete development (Cote, 1999; 
Fraser-Thomas, Cote, & Deakin, 2008). 
b) Athletes felt misunderstood by family. Other participants felt resentful and 
rebellious towards their family, as family members did not understand the situation the 
athletes were in: "I talked to my parents about it. They were more concerned about the 
school aspect versus the swimming. They didn't really want me to swim, but focus more 
on my school."(P-8) 
Here we see evidence of athletes perceiving their parents to show a lack of 
understanding of how athletes' injuries were affecting them. Parents understood that their 
child-athlete's situation was frustrating, but unfortunately athletes felt that their parents 
did not always understand and appreciate the emotional burden that they were 
experiencing. As a result, parents may have promoted negative interactions and 
experiences with their children, leading their children to feel misunderstood, resentful, 
and frustrated with their parents. These findings support past findings that parents often 
hinder their children's healthy development in sport (Gould, Lauer, Rolo, Jannes, & 
Pennisi, 2006). Furthermore, these findings reinforce past findings suggesting not all 
close relationships are supportive, as support provided through close relationships 
marked by high degrees of conflict can increase stress in injured athletes and hence 
facilitate further negative experiences (Dakof & Taylor, 1990) 
56 
c) Athletes felt restrained in their communications with family. Most participants 
did not communicate their emotions and feelings about their injury experiences to their 
families. 
Researcher: So who was your support system throughout the injury rehab 
process? 
P-12: Me. 
Researcher: Okay, what about family, friends, girlfriend? 
P-12: No, I was on my own most of the time. I don't know, I was a standard 24 
year old guy. 
The quote above reflects that athletes sometimes chose not to engage family 
members to support them through the injury process. Athletes may not have recognized 
the potential benefits of having emotional support. Because athletes are often looking for 
solutions to the physical pain, they may forget or fail to acknowledge the emotional side 
of the injury experience. As a result there is misunderstanding by the athletes about how 
supportive their families could be in this situation. It is also possible that such initial 
reactions from the athletes were merely emotional responses to the injury itself. Prior 
research has noted that athletes experience feelings of separation, loneliness, guilt and 
loss of identity because they no longer vitally contributing to the team (Lewis-Griffith, 
1982). Furthermore, athletes may experience symptoms of withdrawal such as depression 
and irritability, as their injuries cause them to modify training or stop exercising (Morgan 
& Goldston, 1987). The result of such emotional and judgmental responses may facilitate 
a shift in the way athletes interact with significant others. For example, if an athlete is 
getting irritated by his parents, he may choose not to communicate with them. 
57 
Athletes' interactions and experiences with friends and teammates. 
a) Athletes felt supported by friends and teammates. Many of the athletes 
discussed the relationships they had with their friends and teammates throughout their 
injury experience. Most of the relationships made the athletes feel encouraged and 
supported: 
I had a lot of friends who had injuries. I found it easiest to talk to people that have 
gone through similar injury, so I talked to a lot of my friends that have gone 
through injuries like this, because they understand. They were very encouraging. 
It was very frustrating when I couldn't compete at the level I wanted to because of 
the injuries. My last year was particularly hard because I would finish races and 
like it would hurt a lot. Yeah, it was upsetting, but they were always very 
encouraging, and none of them was like, 'Why are you swimming so slow?' (P-l) 
When athletes' injuries became serious and required modifications in training and 
taking time off, athletes often felt that they were getting distanced from their friends, but 
still felt supported by them. One swimmer stated, "My teammates were still supportive of 
me even though I wasn't swimming." (P-5) Another mentioned: 
I love my teammates. They are great. We have a lot of fun, and I didn't want to 
lose that team atmosphere, being there. But they were very supportive of me, and 
like, "Take a little time" and like "Cycle for a bit" and that. So they were really 
good.(P-8) 
Generally, injured athletes found their teammates very understanding. Many 
athletes felt that their injury situation was understood by their injured teammates, as they 
too had gone, or were going through similar experiences. As a result, athletes did not feel 
isolated but instead experienced an environment of inclusion with their peers. 
b) Athletes felt restrained in their communications with friends and teammates. 
On some occasions, athletes in this study reported feeling restrained in sharing their 
emotions with their friends and teammates. 
58 
P-6: Probably my girl friend and my friends. They obviously know that I don't 
like it [being injured] and stuff, but I don't, I don't like to cry about things. I don't 
like to go and be, "Ooh it hurts." 
Researcher: So you were saying, "It hurts." and that's it. 
P-6:1 was saying "It hurts." Like I'm mad about this and that, but I mean, they 
know too, that it sucks for me, for someone to just keep on saying it, is, "Okay, be 
quiet." 
c) Athletes felt judged by friends and teammates: Finally, some athletes expressed 
that they felt judged by their peers and expressed that they were worried about what 
others thought of them during their rehabilitation. Sometimes athletes felt that others 
thought that they were faking their pain and were just 'slacking off from the workout. 
Overall, our results show that many injured athletes had supportive and 
meaningful relations with their friends and teammates during their injury. However, in 
some situations, athletes questioned the level of support from their teammates. It may be 
that athletes were again unable to communicate their feelings to others, which led to a 
misunderstanding regarding the level of support available from swimming peers. 
Athletes' interactions and experiences with doctors. Athletes expressed mixed 
reactions to their interactions and experiences with the family doctors and sports 
medicine specialists. 
a) Doctors were knowledgeable and helpful. Many athletes found that the doctors 
listened to them and took their injuries seriously. They felt that they were noticed and 
helped. P-4 said: "It [seeing a sport doctor] was a step to seeing a physiotherapist, but 
they [sport doctors] wanted to know what was going on and what your injury was." P-l 1 
also outlined, "The sports doctor was really good. He was more interested in treating the 
problem than the symptoms. He was looking for the cause of the symptoms." 
59 
b) Doctors were not knowledgeable or helpful. Other participants expressed 
disappointing experiences with their doctors as they were not understanding or 
knowledgeable, and provided poor advice. P-7 said, "Family doctor is too general to even 
know what he is talking about, so he is pointless to go to." 
Some athletes also expressed feelings of frustration and disappointment in their 
doctors, particularly when they were prescribed medications to deal with the pain of their 
injuries, rather than getting recommendations on treatments that would heal and prevent 
relapses of their injuries. 
I'm thinking that modern medicine is more of a modern chemistry that it's 
actually practicing. I don't want you to treat my symptoms - it's pointless. The 
cause is what is hurting. I don't need an anti-inflammatories - maybe I do - but 
the point is that I also need to treat the injury, because I obviously don't know 
how to. It hurts and I think that if I stretch, it would be better, but at the end of the 
day, I don't know. (P-ll) 
c) Athletes rebelled against doctors' recommendations. Some athletes were told 
by their doctors to stop sport participation as a result of their injuries, but athletes 
sometimes dismissed those suggestions and rebelled against the recommendations: "I 
took only a weekend off. They [sport doctors] told me to take 6 weeks off, but I refused." 
(P-l) 
In sum, athletes again reported mixed experiences interacting with significant 
others who could play important supportive roles, in this case doctors. Athletes tended to 
approach doctors with high hopes for injury and pain solutions. They believed that 
doctors would have answers because they considered them knowledgably about their 
injuries. Unfortunately, in some cases expectations for positive experiences turned 
60 
negative, and athletes became disappointed with practitioners, their treatments, and their 
recommendations. 
Athletes' Coping Strategies 
Participants discussed numerous different coping strategies that they used during 
the recovery process from their injuries. Table 2.3 summarizes the six distinct categories 
of the coping strategies. 
Athletes activated their support systems. Numerous participants discussed using 
their support systems as a coping strategy to facilitate their injury rehabilitation process. 
a) Athletes looked to coaches to get help. Many of the athletes approached their 
coach to get help dealing with their injury through the rehabilitation process. Athletes 
often approached coaches to seek advice on how they should deal with their life and 
training while they were injured. Furthermore, athletes met with their coaches to create 
return plans and set new short and long term goals for the swimming season. One 
participant also worked closely with his coach to understand the cause of the injury and 
adjust his swimming stroke biomechanically. 
b) Athletes felt supported by medical team practitioners. Some athletes felt very 
supported by medical team practitioners. In particular, they trusted practitioners, and felt 
that these individuals cared about their injuries. As such, athletes opened up emotionally 
to medical staff and got support from them during the injury process. 
c) Athletes talked to friends and family. For some athletes, family members and 
close friends supported them through the injury experience. This support came in 
numerous forms, such as having a coffee with a teammate after a frustrating workout 
61 
Athletes spoke and connected with people who had similar experiences. Many athletes 
appeared to be looking for people that could fully understand what they were going 
through. A few participants discussed speaking and connecting with other people who 
had similar experiences.. 
There are a couple of girls in my team which have struggled with bad back 
injuries over the past few years. So it's been one of them in particular. I meet - we 
go to have a coffee or whatever every so often. (P-l) 
Some even created support groups to meet and support each other during the highs and 
lows of their injuries: 
I think it's good because it's through that experience, having that similar 
experience, we were able to connect. I can hopefully make it better for other 
people, and encourage them, because this sucks. You know, trying to think of 
positives, it was... I did learn a lot through it. It was frustrating. (P-l) 
In sum, these results suggest athletes activated their support systems to help them 
cope with their injuries. Past research suggests social support can be informational, 
emotional, and practical (Gould et al., 1997). Athletes tended to seek all three types of 
support from coaches. More specifically, athletes were interested in knowing how to deal 
with the situation of being injured, and how to modify short and long term goals in light 
of the injury. Interestingly, that only a few athletes reported seeking emotional support 
from their coaches. Instead, athletes sought emotional support primarily from their 
medical team, friends, and family. 
Athletes modified their training. Many athletes modified their training based on 
recommendations by coaches, medical team staff, or their own judgment, in order to 
better cope throughout their injury rehabilitation process. 
62 
a) Athletes modified training as suggested by the coach. Most athletes discussed 
how they listened to coaches' workout suggestions in order to help them properly recover 
from injuries while still staying engaged in swimming throughout the season. For 
example, P-5 outlined, "I only swam singles [one workout a day] my first year - no 
morning and evening practices until [my injury got better]." 
b) Athletes modified training as suggested by the medical team. Many athletes 
were given suggestions by the medical team on how to deal with their injury and how to 
modify their training in order to facilitate recovery. Three of the injured athletes followed 
the suggestions while others chose not to. Medical suggestions included taking time off 
from sport, reducing the training volume to 20% of the normal volume, increasing 
strength training and core work, incorporating physiotherapy exercises into the training 
program, and engaging in injury specific workout modifications such as swimming open 
turns (i.e., for a swimmer who herniated her lower back). 
c) Athletes modified their training on their own to reduce pain. Several athletes 
reported that they did not have the support and understanding of their coaches regarding 
their injuries, and as a result, many found alternative ways to deal with their injuries. 
Participants modified their training in a variety of ways such as alternating strokes, 
moving to a slower paced lane, finding reasons to leave workout early, or skipping 
workouts altogether: "In my second year I wouldn't go to practice when my shoulder 
would really hurt. If it would just randomly hurt in the morning, I would just forget it. I 
would just get back in bed" (P-9). 
If pain persisted I tried to switch to another style [stroke]. I tried to put additional 
space between big sets. Like breaststroke, my groin would start hurting, so I 
63 
actually tried to spread them [breaststroke sets] more apart. Like go for freestyle 
for the next set. (P-l 1) 
Generally, athletes modified their training programs based on suggestions and 
directions from their coaches, medical staff or their own experience, with the intent of 
reducing the severity of the injury and facilitating rehabilitation. However, as mentioned 
earlier, the issue of conflicting messages from important authorities regarding how 
training should be modified (if at all) was challenging for athletes. 
Athletes physically treated injuries. Athletes used a variety of strategies to 
physically treat their injuries. Sometimes these strategies involved others (e.g., medical 
practitioners) and other times they were carried out by the athlete. 
a) Athletes sought medical help. Most athletes recognized that their injury needed 
medical attention, and they sought diagnoses and treatments from a wide variety of 
specialists including family doctors, sports doctors, physiotherapists, athletic therapists, 
massage therapists, chiropractors, and acupuncturists. For some athletes, specialists were 
not able to provide a definitive cause of their injury. Unfortunately, athletes did not 
always appreciate the services they received from the specialists. "[I] changed 
physiotherapists, because I got frustrated with them that they do not understand." (P-l) 
b) Athletes iced injured areas. Many athletes used ice on the injury site to reduce 
inflammation and decrease pain. For example, P-l2 stated, "If it [shoulder] still hurt at 
the end of the training, I would ice it."(P-l 1) 
c) Athletes stretched injured areas. Several athletes spoke of stretching injured 
areas. As one athlete highlighted, this led to relief from pain: 
64 
In between the sets I would be stretching and I would be fine for the next repeat, 
and then after the next repeat I would stretch it and that took the pain away. It's 
like in a 200 meters I will be fine for the first 50 meters and then the pain starts to 
come. Then once the 200 meters [repeat] is done, I [would] stretch it [shoulder] 
for how many seconds we have for rest, and then I do the same thing over and 
over again, and that seemed fine. I never had to stop. (P-9) 
d) Athletes engaged in physiotherapy exercises. As part of physiotherapy 
treatment, athletes were often prescribed exercises to do on their own to relieve pain and 
help with rehabilitation. As P-l 1 outlined, "I would do physiotherapy exercises for 30 
minutes before swimming". 
e) Athletes self-medicated. Some athletes discussed using Advil and Tylenol as a 
coping strategy to assist them to push through their workouts. Interestingly, many of 
these athletes were the same athletes who choose not to follow medical staff 
recommendations to decrease their training or take time off from the sport. One athlete 
was also somewhat ignorant of the health risks associated with the use of so many drugs: 
I remember I was on a heavy Advil diet at this time. [I was training] for the 
championship where I [was swimming] 200 fly [and] 200 IM. I also had some 
stomach problems that were related, because I took like 6 pills a day for like 12 
months, and then someone told me that it was not good. (P-4) 
The results in this section highlight the physical coping strategies athletes 
engaged in, in order to treat their injuries. Given the physiological nature of these coping 
strategies, the discussion of their effectiveness is outside the scope of this paper; 
however, these data provide useful avenues for future research. 
Athletes used personal strategies. Athletes also used a variety of personal 
strategies including goal setting, positive self-talk, listening to their bodies, and 
internalizing emotions. 
65 
a) Athletes set short and long term goals. A few athletes had meetings with their 
coaches to set short and long term goals while they were working on healing their 
injuries. For instance, P-5 reported adjusting her perspective: "The goal I had was to get 
back training regularly as soon as possible". 
I tried to [set goals]. I would have goals like, "Want to get back doing chin ups by 
a certain time." Stuff like that. Or, "I want to be back in the pool." I had one goal 
after I had my back injury that I want to re-qualify for the nationals. Because of 
the injury I never like, my times had expired. So I had that goal. Usually I found 
that my goals were, I didn't achieve them when I wanted to. But I did get to 
nationals once, so that was good (...) I made a meeting with them [my coaches] to 
talk about my goals and stuff like that. They were aware of what I was planning to 
achieve. (P-l) 
b) Athletes used positive self-talk. Participants also used positive self-talk as a 
method to help themselves through the injury process. For example, P-l said, "Actually I 
used to congratulate myself after doing things. Like, I did 200 butterfly. 'But you know 
what? You have finished it. That's good'. Stuff like that." 
c) Athletes learned to listen to their bodies. A few participants discussed trying to 
listen to their bodies. For example, P-l said, "I was pretty good in knowing where my 
limits were, so I just kind of swam what I could. Ultimately, I had to take care of myself. 
Nobody could do that for me, cause nobody knows when it hurt." 
d) Athletes remained closed and kept emotions to self. Some participants chose to 
close up emotionally to cope while they were experiencing their injury. 
Results of this section suggest athletes used a range of personal coping strategies 
to deal with their injuries. It is particularly interesting that many athletes chose to 
internalize their emotions during the injury experience. Previous research has reinforced 
the importance of emotional coping strategies (Gould et al.,1997); however, athletes in 
66 
this study failed to discuss emotional coping strategies. It is possible that a sport 
psychologist could provide more informed emotional support to athletes by helping them 
be more in tune with their emotions related to their injuries and to deal with the impact of 
their injuries on other aspects of their life. Though some would criticize that the sport 
psychologists, as other medical care professionals, are imbedded in culture of risk 
system, and as such they too won't be able to fully care and help the athlete with their 
situation. To clarify, I will present the following example: the sport psychologist would 
most likely be hired by the team of the injured athletes, and in order to help the athlete 
while maintaining their job the therapist would need to accommodate the needs of both, 
care for the athlete, and return the athlete to competition as soon as possible. As a result, 
athletes won't have the full care of therapist for their well being. 
Athletes persevered through injuries. Athletes used a variety of coping strategies 
to persevere through their injuries, including underplaying them, ignoring the pain, and 
ignoring the recommended training modifications. 
a) Athletes underplayed their injuries. Almost all the athletes outlined how they 
underplayed their injuries. Many did not take their injury seriously at the beginning, and 
thought it was just a pain as a result of training. In the example below, P-12 discusses 
how the injury was a hindrance to his ability to swim 
Researcher: What did you do when you experienced pain? 
P-12: Ignored it 
Researcher: Ignored it. Why? 
P-12: Because I thought it would just go away. Like if you try harder it would be 
gone. The one on my side dogged me for a long time. I was fighting it all the 
67 
time. I would be walking and it would hurt. I would eat too fast and the muscle 
would hurt. Like it was ridicules how much that damn thing would hurt, and I 
remember there would be times when I would be going to practices and I wasn't 
worried about intensity or pushing it. I was worried about it flaring up the whole 
time. It's all that bothered me. I wasn't worried in a sense of hurt, more of a sense 
of it seems like, what's the word, hindrance. I was hindering my ability to swim 
hard. 
Researcher: Once you got pain what did you do? You go to the workout and it 
starts to hurt, what would you do? 
P-12:1 tried to stretch it out. I tried to keep swimming but I didn't want to waste 
the practice. 
b) Athletes ignored injury pain. Some athletes worked hard to ignore the existence 
of pain and even pretended that the pain did not exist: "I complained a little bit about it, 
but other than that - no [I didn't tell anyone]. I just worked through. I basically pretended 
that it [pain] was never there." (P-10) 
c) Athletes ignored training modification recommendations. Later on in the injury 
process, athletes were often recommended to reduce their training volume and/or take a 
break from the sport to facilitate the healing of the injury. But instead, many felt that they 
should push through the injury and continue training even though pain was present. P-l 
said, "[I] pushed through until [my] disk herniated." P-8 also said she "Pushed through 
until [her] shoulder dislocated." 
Findings in this suggest that a common coping strategy for athletes was simply to 
push through training. These findings support Flint's (1998) suggestion and Abgarov et 
al.'s (2009) findings that athletes often push through their injuries. Given the importance 
of reduced training loads for maximizing recovery and rehabilitation, these results are 
particularly troubling. While considerably more work needs to be done to comprehend 
68 
the psychology underpinning this behaviour, sport psychologists, in collaboration with 
coaches and medical staff could play a more active role in helping athletes understand the 
complex relationship between their physical pain and psychological state, to in turn guide 
them towards a more appropriate training behaviours. Furthermore, results reinforce past 
research that that athletes are effected by the culture of risk and as a result they underplay 
their injuries and normalize their pain. 
Athletes made significant changes. Finally, some athletes chose to cope with their 
injuries by making significant life changes such as altering their training environments or 
withdrawing from the sport completely. 
a) Athletes changed training environments. Two participants decided to change 
training environments as a result of their injuries. One chose to do so because he felt that 
staying with the same team would lead him to put too much pressure on himself to push 
though the injury: 
I knew that staying in my team I would push myself too much to keep the rhythm 
with the other ones and accelerate my progression [return from injury]. So I knew 
that a change in environment to control [was beneficial], not be tempted to do too 
much to fast. (P-4) 
b) Athletes withdrew from the sport. Some injured athletes could not stand the 
pain anymore or got burnt out, and ended up dropping out of swimming. Others chose to 
withdraw from the sport to allow proper injury healing. However, most of withdrawals 
were preceded by a failed attempt to push through the injury. Further, most athletes chose 
to take a break only after they completed their swimming season. 
I said that I am going to take a big total break and do something else, and you 
know, think more about the school and think about something else, instead of 
swimming. So I worked in my field that summer and cleared my mind of all those 
69 
things and I said to my coach that I was quitting the sport at that time, and I was 
serious at that time. (P-2) 
Findings in this section suggest athletes sometimes took significant steps to cope 
with their injuries. In some cases, these steps were very proactive (i.e., switching clubs to 
avoid feeling the pressure to push too hard through the injury). In other cases, the change 
was more devastating to athletes, who chose to withdraw from the sport. It is interesting 
to note that withdrawal was only chosen after every other option was exhausted. 
General Discussion 
The purpose of this study was to gain understanding of varsity athletes' 
experiences going through the injury rehabilitation process. Results revealed that varsity 
athletes had a wide variety of injury profiles, experienced varying injury rehabilitation 
paths, had different interactions with significant others, mixed emotional experiences, 
and different coping strategies. Our diverse findings are to be expected given our 
purposeful sample of participants (i.e., wide range in performance levels, training 
backgrounds, varsity experiences, and personal experiences). 
Strengths and Limitations 
Our study was unique in that it was the first to capture a wide perspective of 
athletes' perceptions of their microtraumatic injury experiences, while swimming on a 
varsity team. Athletes were very open and honest in sharing their experiences, 
particularly their emotions and interactions with significant others while going through 
unpleasant swimming-related injuries. While athletes were very open, and we used a 
variety of techniques to assure the trustworthiness of the data analysis, the nature of this 
study was retrospective and only athletes were interviewed. As a result, we cannot 
70 
assume that the experiences discussed represent the full picture of athletes' injury 
experiences, given that significant others such as coaches would likely provide different 
perspectives. 
Coping Strategies 
Our results revealed that athletes engaged in a wide range of coping strategies to 
deal with and recover from their injuries. Athletes seemed to develop different coping 
strategies based on their interpretation of their injury needs and influences from others, 
coupled with their emotional states at the time. Such strategies ranged from physically 
coping with the injury at hand, to coping with the consequences of being injured (e.g., 
emotions). 
Findings related to athletes' coping strategies bring to light varsity athletes' 
determination to push through injury. Athletes clearly loved their sport and seemed 
willing to do anything in their power to continue participating. Over and over athletes 
reported coping with their injuries by underplaying the injury's severity, trying to ignore 
the physical pain, not communicating their injury status to their coach, and not asking for 
help from others. 
Implications 
While findings provide a foundation for a number of important implications, a 
few warrant particular attention. First, findings clearly highlight the importance of better 
communication between athletes and significant others. It is clear that athletes would 
have experienced fewer misunderstandings, would have felt better supported, and would 
have experienced more swimming enjoyment had they had better communication with 
71 
coaches, medical staff, family members and other significant figures. Evidently, coaches 
and significant others can only provide advice when they are provided information. By 
the same token, significant others must show openness to athletes so that they are willing 
to provide this information. Furthermore, athletes' should be educated about their 
situation and appropriate communication with the medical team is also of critical 
importance in keeping athletes from feeling conflicted as they try to determine whose 
advice to follow. Medical team and coaching staff must take the time to fully understand 
athletes' physical and emotional needs, and work as a team in tailoring a unique 
rehabilitation and safe return to full training programs. Second, there is a need to better 
educate medical and the coaching staff about the emotional effects that injuries have on 
athletes. Sport psychologists could play an important role in facilitating these educational 
processes though not necessary that they are currently qualified to fill this kind of 
position. Such education would improve the communications levels between the parties 
and as a result, all of athletes' physical and emotional needs would be better addressed. 
Future Directions 
A key requirement for research in this area to continue to move forward is a clear 
definition of injury, as current definitions within the literature are highly inconsistent. 
Because of this, chronic and gradual onset injuries such as those seen most often in sports 
such as swimming, often end up being under represented. As such, future research should 
also focus on microtraumatic injuries in sport. In addition, more research is required 
focusing on investigating effective strategies to assist injured athletes throughout the 
injury rehabilitation process. Evaluation of current coping strategies should be examined 
72 
for effectiveness, and further intervention studies could promote better understanding of 
the effectiveness of such strategies. Finally, developing preventative strategies within this 
field is very important. 
Conclusions 
In summary, athletic injury is a common obstacle that athletes encounter during 
their university athletic career in swimming (Abgarov et al., 2009). Our study suggests 
that having a swimming-related injury while swimming on a varsity team presents a 
significant burden for athletes. In particular, athletic injuries inevitably have strong 
emotional effects on the injured athletes (Faris, 1985). Consequently, athletes would 
benefit from acknowledging that they were effected emotionally, and communicating this 
to significant others in order to achieve better injury experiences. Further attention to 
these issues would promote faster and more successful rehabilitation from sport-related 
microtraumatic injury. 
73 
Table 2.1: Descriptive Information for Study Participants, Including Age, Gender, 
Injury History and Current Participation Status. 
Participants # Location of Injury 
Before Varsity During Varsity 
Injury Location Experiences with 
Significant Others Injury Status at 
Time of Interview Status of Sport 
Participation 
Participant 1 
Female 
Age: 24 Hip Flexor 
Slipped Disk-Lower Back 
Right Shoulder-Tendinitis 
Left Shoulder-Tendinitis -coach 
-family 
-friends/teamates 
-physiotherapist 
-athletic therapy 
-massage therapist 
-family doctor 
-sport doctor 
-chiropractor 
-acupuncture Still relapses 
Still relapses 
Still relapses 
Resolved Stopped Swimming as 
Result of Injuries but Later 
Returned to finish Career 
then Stopped 
Participant 2 
Age: 26 Broken Elbow Right Shoulder- Pain 
Left Shoulder- Pain 
Right Knee- Pain 
Left Knee- Pain -coach 
-family 
-friends/teamates 
-physiotherapist 
-massage therapist 
-family doctor 
-sport doctor 
-chiropractor 
-acupancture Still relapses Stopped Swimming as 
Result of Injuries 
Table 2.1 :Cont'd. 74 
Participants # Location of Injury 
Before Varsity During Varsity 
Injury Location Experiences with 
Significant Others Injury Status at 
Time of Interview Status of Sport 
Participation 
Participant 3 
Male 
Age: 23 Right Shoulder Lower Back -coach 
-family 
-friends/teamates 
-physiotherapist 
-massage therapist 
-sport doctor Stopped Swimming as 
Result of Injuries 
Participant 4 
Male 
Age: 28 Tom Ankle 
Right Shoulder-Tendinitis 
Left Shoulder-Tendinitis -coach 
-family 
-friends/teamates 
-physiotherapist 
-massage therapist 
-sport doctor All Injuries are Resolved Retired From Swimming 
after Graduation 
Table 2.1: Cont'd. 75 
Participants # Location of Injury 
Before Varsity During Varsity 
Injury Location Experiences with 
Significant Others Injury Status at 
Time of Interview Status of Sport 
Participation 
Participant 5 
Female 
Age: 24 Shoulder -coach 
-family 
-friends/teamates 
-physiotherapist 
-massage therapist 
-sport doctor Injury Healed Retired From Swimming 
after Graduation 
Participant 6 
Male 
Age: 21 Elbow pain Right Shoulder-Supra 
spinatus & Biceps 
Tendinitis -coach 
-family 
-friends/teamates 
-athletic therapy Still Experiencing Pain in 
Both Shoulders. Still Swimming Varsity at 
Time of Study 
Participant 7 
Female 
Age: 20 Right Shoulder- Rotator 
Cuff & Biceps Tendinitis 
Left Shoulder-Supra 
spinatus & Biceps 
Tendinitis -coach 
-family 
-friends/teamates 
-physiotherapist 
-athletic therapy 
-massage therapist 
-family doctor 
-personal trainer Still Experiencing Pain in 
Right Shoulder. Still Swimming Varsity at 
Time of Study 
76 
Table 2.1: Cont'd. 
Participants # Location of Injury 
Before Varsity During Varsity 
Injury Location Experiences with 
Significant Others Injury Status at 
Time of Interview Status of Sport 
Participation 
Participant 8 
Age: 24 Right Shoulder-
Supraspinatus Tendinitis 
Letf Shoulder-
lnfraspinatus 
Tendinopathy -coach 
-family 
-friends/teamates 
-physiotherapist 
-athletic therapy 
-family doctor 
-sport doctor Still Experiencing Pain in 
Right Shoulder. After Graduation Joined 
Master's Swimming Club 
Participant 9 
Male 
Age: 22 Right Shoulder-
Supraspinatus Tendinitis Right Shoulder-
Supraspinatus Tendinitis 
Left Shoulder-
Supraspinatus Tendinitis -coach 
-family 
-friends/teamates 
-physiotherapist 
-athletic therapy 
-massage therapist 
-chiropractor Still Experiencing Pain in 
Both Shoulders. Still Swimming Varsity at 
Time of Study 
Participant 10 
Male 
Age: 22 Right Shoulder 
Right Knee -coach 
-athletic therapy Right Knee Starts Hurting 
During Breastroke Still Swimming Varsity at 
Time of Study 
Table 2.1: Cont'd. 
Participants # Location of Injury 
Before Varsity During Varsity 
Injury Location Experiences with 
Significant Others Injury Status at 
Time of Interview Status of Sport 
Participation 
Participant 11 
Female 
Age: 24 Knee 
Groin 
Elbow 
Shoulders 
Ankle Knee 
Groin 
Elbow 
Shoulders 
Ankle -coach 
-family 
-friends/teamates 
-physiotherapist 
-family doctor Still Experiences Pain in 
all the Injury Sites Stopped Swimming as 
Result of Injuries 
Participant 12 
Male 
Age: 28 Pulled Psoas Muscle 
Left Shoulder 
Broken Left Ulna -coach 
-friends/teamates 
-physiotherapist 
-family doctor 
-sport doctor 
-chiropractor Still Experiences Pain in 
all the Psoas Muscle and 
Left Ulna After Graduation Joined 
Master's Swimming Club 
78 
Table 2.2: Summary of Athletes Experiences with Significant Others 
Interactions and Experiences with Significant Others 
1. Coaches and Assistant Coaches 
a) Failure to report pain/injury to coaches 
b) Poor communication between athletes and coaches 
c) Solid athlete-coach relationships 
d) Positive training-related experiences with coaches 
e) Negative training-related experiences with coaches 
2. Physiotherapists, Athletic therapists, & Massage therapists 
a) Positive experiences with therapists 
b) Negative experiences with therapists 
c) Inconvenience, frustration, and monotony of the rehabilitation process 
d) Therapists provided messages that conflicted with other significant 
figures 
3. Chiropractor and Acupuncturist 
a) Chiropractors and Acupuncturisits were supportive and helpful 
b) Treatments were invasive and painful 
c) Treatments were financially inaccessible. 
Participant 1 
± 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
± 
V 
V 
-
V 
Participant 2 
± 
V 
V 
V 
-
V 
V 
V 
+ 
V 
V 
Participant 3 
-
-
-
-
-
+ 
V 
V 
-
-
-
Participant 4 
± 
V 
V 
V 
± 
V 
V 
V 
V 
-
-
-
Participant 5 
± 
V 
V 
V 
-
V 
V 
-
-
-
Participant 6 
± 
V 
V 
V 
V 
± 
V 
V 
V 
-
-
-
Participant 7 
± 
V 
V 
V 
± 
V 
V 
V 
V 
Participant 8 
± 
V 
V 
V 
V 
± 
V 
V 
V 
± 
V 
V 
Participant 9 
± 
V 
V 
V 
± 
V 
V 
V 
+ 
V 
V 
Participant 10 
± 
V 
V 
± 
V 
V 
V 
V 
-
-
-
Participant 11 
-
V 
V 
V 
V 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Participant 12 
± 
V 
V 
V 
V 
± 
V 
V 
V 
+ 
V 
Total 
5 
9 
6 
7 
10 
9 
8 
8 
7 
5 
1 
3 
Table 2.2: Cont'd. 79 
4. Family 
a) Athletes felt supported by family 
b) Athletes felt misunderstood by family 
c) Athletes felt restrained in their communications with family 
5. Friends and Teammates 
a) Athletes felt supported by friends and teammates 
b) Athletes felt restrained in their communications with friends and 
teammates 
c) Athletes felt judged by friends and teammates 
6. Doctors 
a) Doctors were knowledgeable and helpful 
b) Doctors were not knowledgeable or helpful 
C) Athletes rebelled against doctors' recommendations ±- + - + --±- + 
V 
V V 
V V 
V V 
V V 
V V V 
V V 
V -
-
-V 
V V 5 
5 
8 
± - + - + - - ± - + 
V 
V 
V V 
V V 
V V 
V V V 
V V 
V -
-
-V 
V 
V 5 
8 
4 
+ + ± - ± ± 
V -
-
-V 
V V V 
V -
-
-V 
V -
-
--
-
-V 
V 
V V 
V 5 
3 
5 
80 
Table 2.3: Summary of Athletes Coping Strategies Dealing with Their Injury/Injuries. 
Coping Strategies 
1. Athletes Activated Their Support Systems 
a. Looked to Coaches to Get Help 
b. Felt Supported by Medical Team Practitioners 
c. Talked to Friends and Family 
d. Spoke and Connected with People who had Similar 
Experiences 
2. Athletes Modified their Training 
a. Modified Training as Suggested by the Coach 
b. Modified Training as Suggested by the Medical Team 
c. Modified their Training on their Own to Reduce Pain 
3. Athletes Physically Treated Injuries 
a. Athletes Sought Medical Help 
b. Iceing Injured Area 
c. Stretched Injured Areas 
d. Engaged in Physiotherapy Exercises 
e. Self-medicated 
Participant 1 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
Participant 2 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
Participant 3 
V 
V 
V 
V 
Participant 4 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
Participant 5 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
Participant 6 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
Participant 7 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
Participant 8 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
Participant 9 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
Participant 10 
V 
V 
V 
V 
Participant 11 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
Participant 12 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
Total 
10 
3 
2 
3 
10 
3 
5 
11 
9 
5 
11 
7 
81 
Table 2.3: Cont'd. 
4. Personal Strategies 
a. Set Short and Long Term Goals 
b. Used Positive Self Talk 
c. Learning to Listen to their Bodies 
d. Remained Closed and Kept Emotions to Self 
5. Athletes Persevered Through Injuries 
a. Underplayed their Injuries 
b. Ignored Injury Pain 
c. Ignored Training Modification Recommendations 
6. Athletes Made Significant Changes 
a. Changed Training Environments 
b. Athletes Withdrew from the Sport V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V V 
V 
V 
V 
V V 
V 
V V 
V 
V V 
A/ 
V 
V 
V 
V V 
V 
V 
V 
V V 
V 
V V 
V 
V V 
V 
V V 
V 
V V 
V 
V 
V V 
V 
V 4 
2 
3 
3 
11 
4 
10 
3 
8 
82 
Figure 2.1.a: Athletes' Interactions with Coach/Assistant Coach and Subsequent 
Emotions and Judgments Throughout the Injury Process. 
The circle represents the number of athletes that discussed positive (white) 
and negative (black) interactions with the Coach/Assistant Coach while 
injured. The bars represent the number of meaningful units of information 
for each positive and negative emotion or judgment athletes experienced 
while interacting with the significant other. 
| 10g 
x UJ 
< < < CO CD 
rj:]jjr]LiQnni:inj 
COACH / ASSISTANT COACH 
83 
Figure 2.1.b: Athletes' Interactions with Physiotherapist/Athletic Therapist/Massage 
Therapist and Subsequent Emotions and Judgments Throughout the Injury 
Process. 
The circle represents the number of athletes that discussed positive (white) 
and negative (black) interactions with the Physiotherapist/Athletic 
Therapist/Massage Therapist while injured. The bars represent the number 
of meaningful units of information for each positive and negative emotion 
or judgment athletes experienced while interacting with the significant 
other. 
| 9 
-z. 
o 8 
OmOo^BowO] 
.•..•.•MM.! 
PHYSIOTHERAPIST / ATHLETIC THERAPIST / MASSAGE THERAPIST 
84 
Figure 2.1.c: Athletes' Interactions with Chiropractor/Acupuncture and Subsequent 
Emotions and Judgments Throughout the Injury Process. 
The circle represents the number of athletes that discussed positive (white) 
and negative (black) interactions with the Chiropractor/Acupuncture while 
injured. The bars represent the number of meaningful units of information 
for each positive and negative emotion or judgment athletes experienced 
while interacting with the significant other. 
# 
DDCUJ 
"J£ 95 h- tn < <iuo 
X IE c/5 
• •• CHIROPRACTOR / ACUPUNCTURIST 
85 
Figure 2.1.d: Athletes' Interactions with Family/Friends/Teammates and Subsequent 
Emotions and Judgments Throughout the Injury Process. 
The circle represents the number of athletes that discussed positive (white) 
and negative (black) interactions with the Family/Friends/Teammates while 
injured. The bars represent the number of meaningful units of information 
for each positive and negative emotion or judgment athletes experienced 
while interacting with the significant other. 
S | 
iy §J men 
Q d = >QQ 
FAMILY / FRIENDS / TEAMMATES 
86 
Figure 2.1.e: Athletes' Interactions with Family Doctor/Sport Doctor and Subsequent 
Emotions and Judgments Throughout the Injury Process. 
The circle represents the number of athletes that discussed positive (white) 
and negative (black) interactions with the Family Doctor/Sport Doctor 
while injured. The bars represent the number of meaningful units of 
information for each positive and negative emotion or judgment athletes 
experienced while interacting with the significant other. 
4 O 2;0 
.mliliilmh ~-_ 
FAMILY DOCTOR / SPORT DOCTOR 
87 
General Thesis Discussion 
The first aim of my thesis (Study 1) was to create an injury profile within the 
varsity population in Canada, specifically in the province of Ontario, and to identify 
training-related risk factors which may predispose athletes to injury. Results reinforce past 
findings (McMaster, & Troup 1993; Rovere, & Nichols 1985) suggesting a high number of 
swimming-related injuries. Findings also reinforce the notion that shoulders are the most 
common injury site, followed by the knees and neck/back. While results support past 
findings, the number of injured athletes currently competing at the varsity level in Canada 
is concerning. Furthermore it was interesting to observe that training factors and injury 
histories (both before the swim season and during) were the same for males and females 
but the logistic regression analyses indicated distinct differences in predicting injury 
occurrence in the two genders. 
The second aim of this thesis (Study 2) was to gain understanding of varsity 
athletes' experiences going through the injury rehabilitation process. Results revealed that 
varsity athletes had wide variety of injury profiles, experienced varying injury 
rehabilitation paths, had different interactions with significant others, mixed emotional 
experiences, and different coping strategies. Moreover, the diversity across the results 
emphasizes the highly individual experiences of each athlete. 
In examining our findings in light of the theoretical frameworks discussed at the 
beginning of this thesis, we are able to offer greater understanding of the complexities and 
limitations of some of the models. For example, the Return the Sport Model (Taylor & 
Taylor, 1997) is indeed unidirectional, and it fails to account for individual differences of 
88 
athletes' injury experiences. Specifically, this model does do not account for injured 
athletes that sustain a second injury while still recovering from the first injury. The 
Integrated Model (Wise-Bjornstal et al. 1998) is able to better to account for many of the 
complexities that we observed such as athletes personal characteristics. As such, we 
believe this model to be of much interest in for future investigations. Of course, the 
numerous complexities of this model are also it's limitation, in that it is very difficult to 
test all of the postulates of this model. The Biopsy'etiological Model (Brewer et al. 2002) 
serves as a framework to better understand how psychological factors affect the injury 
rehabilitation outcomes; however, once again the model is very general. Podlog and 
Eklund (2007) state that this model fails to address that transition from rehabilitation phase 
to the training and competition phase. This is a significant flaw given our findings that 
highlight past injury and time off as significant risk factors associated with re-injury. 
Finally, the Self-Determination Theory (STD) highlights the importance of motivation as a 
driving force in the rehabilitation process. Interestingly, athletes in the present study were 
not clearly forthcoming with regard to the nature of their motivation to return after injury. 
As such, it would likely be very beneficial to incorporate the STD framework withi other 
models discussed above in order to encapsulate all the possible factors that may affect 
athletes' rehabilitation experience. 
89 
Implications 
The results of this thesis suggest a number of practical implications. 
1. General Education: These results emphasize the need for increased education of 
recovery and rehabilitation from injury among coaches, parents, athletes and other 
significant others who may assist an athlete's return to training and competition. 
Moreover, coaches and support staff should be aware of injury prevalence in their 
sport and the number of athletes potentially 'training through' injuries, as well as 
the different emotions associated with athletes' injury experiences. It is also 
important that the medical team and coaching staff take the time to fully understand 
athletes' physical and emotional needs, and work as a team in tailoring a unique 
rehabilitation and safe return to full training programs. 
2. Preventative Strategies: Athletes' swimming and injury histories should be more 
closely examined to better understand injury occurrence among varsity athletes. 
Furthermore, coaches should be aware of the increased risk of injury for athletes 
who took time off from their sport. 
3. Association Changes: 
a. Coaches and the OUA Association should evaluate their programs as the 
incidence of injury is very high among athletes, and increased within the 
season. It is possible that current training programs or competitions are not 
appropriate for swimmers. 
b. Training and Education: Coaches should be trained in early identification 
and evaluation of injuries prone athletes. However, this information should 
90 
not be used negatively, such as a deselecting criteria from national teams. 
Further, coaches should be educated about the importance of healthy sport 
participation which should facilitate lower dropout rates and improved 
quality of the spotting experience. Finally, coaches should be discouraged 
from taking a passive role or engaging in behavior that might be viewed 
negatively by athletes, 
c. There is a strong need in the swimming community to educate athletes who 
are swimming while injured, as this behavior may cause detrimental effects 
on their future sport participation and long term athletic development. It 
may be possible to avoid chronic swimming related injuries if a number of 
things change in the high performance swimming community. In particular, 
athletes should be educated about the different types of pain that are 
involved in the sport, such as muscle soreness, lactic acid pain, and joint 
pain, followed up by burnout prevention education and evaluation (e.g., 
differences between general fatigue versus chronic fatigue, and burnout). 
4. Injury Management Strategies: General rehabilitation should be incorporated 
within long term athlete development programs. Furthermore, preventative 
practices should be emphasized within training programs and in the Canadian 
swimming community as a whole. The OUA Association needs to take an active 
stand to assist its members in dealing with injuries and be proactive in education 
about preventative practices. Athletic season duration should be considered and 
inclusion of summer programs should be considered if they allow athletes more 
91 
time and less pressure to achieve their performance goals. Currently, it seems that 
athletes have a limited window of opportunity to obtain optimal fitness, and 
athletes that took time off from swimming may be under additional pressure to 
keep up with their counterparts who did not take a break during the off season. 
5. Better communication between athletes and significant others. The qualitative data 
from Study 2 suggest that athletes would have experienced fewer 
misunderstandings, would have felt better supported, and would have experienced 
more swimming enjoyment had they had better communication. Clearly, coaches 
and significant others can only provide advice when they know this advice is 
needed. By the same token, significant others must show openness to athletes so 
that they are comfortable asking for assistance. Appropriate communication with 
the medical team is also of critical importance in keeping athletes from feeling 
conflicted as they try to determine whose advice to follow. Establishing open 
communication between the athlete and the coach seems increasingly important for 
ensuring adequate recovery from injury. 
6. Sport psychologists could play an important role in facilitating the educational 
processes outlined above. Such education would improve the communication 
between interested parties and as a result, athlete needs would be better addressed. 
92 
Future Directions 
While there are many areas for further investigation; one particularly important 
area is to better understand gender differences and the distinctive experiences of male and 
female athletes throughout the injury and rehabilitation process, particularly in light of the 
intriguing results from Study 1, which suggested that the prevalence of injuries is similar in 
both genders but its etiology and accompanied risk factors are distinct. Further research is 
necessary to further examine differences between the genders and possible risk factor that 
effect injury prevalence. 
Further investigation is needed to understand the reason behind the 21% (2007-
2008) dropout within the OUA across the swimming season to determine whether injuries 
played any role in their withdrawal. To our knowledge, these are the first data of their kind 
and it is important to understand why athletes discontinue their involvement in a sport 
since participation can have positive effects on health, life satisfaction, and stress, all 
important factors in the life of a collegiate student. 
Future studies could also consider the perspectives of coaches and medical staff to 
better define and evaluate athletes' injuries, leading to more precise injury diagnoses and 
measures of severity. The inclusion of this information would add a level of sophistication 
to the available data analyses. Although this work provides a useful starting point for 
understanding the constraints of varsity swimmers, additional work is important for the 
adequate treatment and prevention of injury in this population. Creation of a surveillance 
system for the Canadian varsity swimming population (and other sports) would provide 
93 
useftil information regarding the etiology of injury and factors affecting the rehabilitation 
process. 
Future investigations of the psychology of sports injury should also focus on 
developing effective coping strategies to assist injured athletes throughout the injury 
experience. Moreover, the coping strategies identified in the current research should be 
assessed for legitimacy. Finally, understanding risk factors and developing preventative 
strategies is important for maximizing athlete potential. 
Conclusion 
Results of this thesis advance our understanding of injury patterns within the 
Canadian varsity swimming population and expand our knowledge regarding the 
psychological impact of injury on athletes' emotional state and participation in sport 
during and after the injury experience. Although there is considerable work to be done to 
complete our understanding of the psychology of injury in this population, these studies 
provide a useful starting point for further work. 
94 
References: Manuscript 1 
Brushoj, C, K. & Bak, K., Johannsen, h., & Fauno, P. (2007). Swimmers' painful shoulder 
arthroscopic findings and return rate to sports. Scandinavian Journal of Medicine & 
Science in Sports, 17(4), 373-377. 
Ericsson, K. A., Krampe, R. Th., & Tesch-Romer, C. (1993). The role of deliberate 
practice in the acquisition of expert performance. Psychological Review, 100(3), 
363-406. 
Fowler, P. J. & Regan W. D. (1986). Swimming injuries of the knee, foot and ankle, 
elbow, and back. Clinics in sports medicine^ 5(1), 139-148. 
Fuller, C. W., Laborde, F., Leather, R. J., & Molloy, M. G. (2008). International rugby 
board rugby world cup 2007 injury survey study. British Journal of Sports 
Medicine, 42, 452-459. 
Goekint, K., Cumps, E., &Meeusen, R. (2007). Prospective registration of competitive 
swimming injuries in Flanders. 12l Annual Congress of the ECSS July 2007, 
Jyvaskyla, Finland. 
Grote, K., T. L. Lincoln, & Gamble, G. (2004). Hip adductor injury in competitive 
swimmers. American Journal of Sports Medicine, 32(1), 104-108. 
Heinonen, B., Ristolainen, L., Kujala, U. M. (2007). The prevelence of swimming injuries 
and their risk factors: A 12 month retrospective study. 12l annual Congress of the 
ECSS, Jyvaskyla, Findland. 
95 
Junge, A., Dvorak, J., & Graf-Baumann, T. (2004). Football injuries during FIFA 
tournaments and the Olympic Games, 1998-2001: Development and 
implementation of an injury-reporting system. Am J Sports Med, 32(suppl 1), 80-
90. 
Kammer, L. C., Young, C. C., & Neidfeldt, M. W. (1999). Swimming injuries and 
Illnesses The Phesician and Sportsmedicine, 27(4), 51-60. 
Kennedy, J. C. Hawkins, & R. Krissoff W. B. (1978). Orthopedic manisfestations of 
swimming. Am J Sport Med, 6(6), 309-322. 
Magra, M., Caine, D., & Mafulli, N. (2007). A review of epidemiology of paediatric elbow 
injuries in sports. Sports Medicine 37(8): 717-735. 
McMaster, W. C. (1996). Swimming injuries -An overview. Sports Medicine, 22(5), 332-
336. 
McMaster, W. C. & Troup, J. (1993). A survey of interfering shoulder pain in Unites 
States competitive swimmers. The American Journal Of Sport Medicine, 21, 67-70. 
McMaster, W. C. (1999). Shoulder injuries in competitive swimmers. Clinics in Sports 
Medicine, 18(2), 349-348. 
Neville, V. J., Molloy, J., Brooks, J. H. M., Speedy D. B., & Atkinson, G. (2006). 
Epidemiology of injuries and illnesses in America's Cup yacht racing. British 
Journal of Sports Medicine, 40, 304-312. 
Pollard, B. (2001). The Prevalence of Shoulder Pain in Elite Level British Swimmers and 
the Effects of Training Technique. British Swimming Coaches & Teachers 
Association. 
96 
Romiti, R., Finch, C. F., & Gabbe, B. (2008). A prospective cohort study of the incidence 
of injuries among junior Australian football players: Evidence for an effect of 
playing-age level. British Journal of Sports Medicine, 42, 441-446. 
Rovere, G. D., & Nichols, A. W.(1985). Frequency, associated factors, and treatment of 
breaststroker's knee in competitive swimmers. Am J Sports Med, 13(March), 99-
104. 
Sallis, R., Jones, k., Sunshine, S., Smith, G., & Simon, L. (2001). Comparing Sports 
Injuries in Men and Women. International journal of Sports Medicine, 22, 420-
423. 
Shick, D. M., Molloy, M. G., & Wiley, J. P. (2008). Injuries during the 2006 women's 
rugby world cup. British Journal of Sports Medicine, 44, 447-451. 
Sporting Goods Manufacturers Association (2008). 2008 Sports and Fitness Participation 
Report. Washington, D.C.; SGMA. 
Wolf, B. R., Ebinger, A. E., Lawler, M. P., & Britton, C. L. (2009). Injury Patterns in 
Division 1 Collegiate Swimming. American Journal of Sport Medicine, July 
24,2009 AJSM PreView P. 1-6. 
97 
References Manuscript 2 
Abgarov, A., Fraser-Thomas, J. & Baker, J. (2009). Injury in varsity swimmers: Identifmg 
risk factors. Manuscript in preparation. 
Beamer, M., Cote, J., & Ericsson, K. A. (1999). A comparison beween international and 
provincial level gymnasts in their pursuit of sport expertise. Proceedings of the 
10th European Congress of Sport Psychology, Prauge, Chech Republic. 
Bianco, T. (2001). Social Support and recovery from sport injury: Elite Skiers share their 
experiences. Research quarterly for exercise and sport, 72, 376-388. 
Brewer BW, Van Raalte, Cornelius & Ptitipas (2000). Psychological Factors, 
Rehabilitation Adherence, and Rehabilitation outcome after Anterior Cruciate 
Ligament Reconstraction. Rehabilitation Psychology, 45(1) 20-37. 
Briker J. & Fry M. (2006). The influence of injured athletes' Perseptions of Social Support 
From ATCs on Their Beliefs About Rehabilitation. Journal of Sport rehabilitation 
15, 156-167. 
Brushoj, C, K. & Bak, K., Johannsen, h., & Fauno, P. (2007). Swimmers' painful shoulder 
arthroscopic findings and return rate to sports. Scandinavian Journal of Medicine & 
Science in Sports, 17(4), 373-377. 
Byerly PN, Worrell T, Gahimer J, Domholdt E. (1994). Rehabilitation compliance in an 
athletic training environment. JAM Train, 29, 352-355. 
Cote, J. (1999). The influence of the family in the development of talent in sports. The 
Sport Psychologist, 13,395-417. 
98 
Cote, J., Salmela, J. H., Baria, A., & Russell, S. J. (1993). Organizing and interpreting 
unstructured qualitative data, The Sport Psychologist, 1, 127-137. 
Dakof, G. A., Taylor, S. E. (1990). Victims [perceptions of social support: what is helpful 
from whom? Jpers Sociopsychology, 58, 80-89. 
Faris, G. J., (1985). Psychological aspects of athletic rehabilitation. Clinics in Sports 
Medicine, 4(3), 545-551. 
Flint, F. A. (1998). Integrating sport psychology and sports medicine in research: The 
dilemmas. Journal of Applied Sport Psychology, 10(1): 83-102. 
Folkman & Lazarus (1980). An analysis of coping in a middle-aged community sample. 
Journal of Health and Social Behaviour, 21, 219-239. 
Fowler, P. J. & Regan W. D. (1986). Swimming injuries of the knee, foot and ankle, 
elbow, and back. Clinics in Sports Medicine^ 5(1), 139-148. 
Fraser-Thomas, J., Cote, J., & Deakin, J. (2008). Examining adolescent sport dropout and 
prolonged engagement from a developmental perspective. Journal of Applied Sport 
Psychology, 20(3), 318-333. 
Gould, D., Udry E. Bridges, D. & Beck, L. (1997). Coping with season ending injuries. 
The sport psychologist, 11, 379-399. 
Grote, K., T. L. Lincoln, & Gamble (2004). Hip adductor injury in competitive 
swimmers. American Journal of Sports Medicine, 32(1) 104-108. 
99 
Hamilton, S. F., Hamilton, M. A. & Pittman, K. (2004). Principles for youth 
development, in: S. F. Hamilton &M. A. Hamilton (Eds) The youth development 
handbook.Coming of age in American communities (Thousand Oaks, CA, Sage), 
3-22. 
Leaderbetter W.B. (1992). Cell-matrix response in tendon injury. Clinics in 
SportsMedicine, 11, 561-562. 
Lewis-Griffith, L. (1982). Athletic injuries can be a pain in the head too. Women's sport, 
4 (4), 44. 
Magra, M., Caine, D., & Mafulli, N. (2007). A review of epidemiology of pediatric elbow 
injuries in sports. Sports Medicine, 37(8): 717-735. 
McMaster, W. C. (1996). Swimming injuries -An overview. Sports Medicine, 22(5), 332-
336. 
McMaster, W. C. & Troup, J. (1993). A survey of interfering shoulder pain in Unites 
States competitive swimmers. The American Journal Of Sport Medicine, 21, 67-70. 
Morgan, W. P., & Goldston, S. E. (1987). Exercise and mental health. (Eds.) Washington,: 
Hemisphere. 
Nixon, H. (1992) A social network analysis of influences on athletes to play with pain and 
injuries. Journal of Sport & Social Issues, 16(2), 127-135. 
Nixon, H. (1994). Coaches views of risk, pain, and injury in sport, with special reference to 
gender difference. Sociology of sport journal, 11, 79-87. 
100 
Podlog, L., Eklund, R. (2006). A longitudinal investigation of competitive athletes' return 
to sport following serious injury. Journal of Applied Sport Psychology. 18(1), 44-
68. 
Podlog, L. , Eklund, R. (2007a). Professional coaches' perspective on the return to sport 
following serious injury. Journal of Applied Sport Psychology. 19(2), 207-225. 
Podlog, L. , Eklund, R. (2007b). The psychosocial aspects of a return to sport following 
serious injury: A review of the literature from a self-determination perspective. 
Psychology of Sport and Exercise, 8, 535-566. 
Ropponen, A., Levalahti, E., Simonen, R., Videman, T., & Battie, M. C. (2001). 
Repeatability of lifetime exercise reporting. Scandinavian Journal of Medicine and 
Science in Sports, 11, 185-192. 
Sallis, R., Jones, k., Sunshine, S., Smith, G., Simon, L. (2001). Comparing Sports Injuries 
in Men and Women. International journal of Sports Medicine, 22, 420-423. 
Smith AM, Scott S, O'Fallon W, Young M. (1990). Emotional responses of athletes to 
injury. Mayo Clin Proc, 65, 38-50. 
Taylor, A., May S. (1996). Threat and coping appraisal as determinants of compliance with 
sports injury rehabilitation: an application of protection motivation theory. J Sports 
Sci, 14, 471-482. 
Taylor, J., Taylor S. (1997). Psychological Approaches to Sports Injury Rehabilitation. 
Gaithersburg, Md: Aspen Press. 
Tesch, R. (1990). Qualitative research analysis types and software tools. New York: 
Falmer Press. 
101 
Udry, E. (1997). Coping and social support among injured athletes following surgery. 
Journal of sport & Exercise Psychology, 19, 71-90. 
Udry, E., Andersen, MB. (2002). Athletic injury and sport behavior. In: Horn TS, ed. 
Advances in sport psychology, 2nd ed. Champaign, III: Human Kinetics. 529-543. 
Wolf, B. R., Ebinger, A. E., Lawler, M. P., & Britton, C. L. (2009). Injury Patterns in 
Division 1 Collegiate Swimming, American Journal of Sport Medicine July 
24,2009 AJSM PreView P. 1-6. 
Young, K., White, P., & McTeer, W. (1994). Body talk: Male athletes reflect on sport, 
injury and pain. Sociology of Sport Journal, 11, 175-194. 
102 
References: Thesis 
Albinson, C. B., and Petrie, T. A. (2003). Cognitive appraisals, stress, and coping: 
Preinjury and postinjury factors influencing psychological adjustment to sport 
injury. Journal of Sport Rehabilitation, 12(4), 306-322. 
Brewer, B. W. (1994). Review Critique of Models of Psychological Adjustments to 
athletic Injury. Journal of Applied Sport Psychology. 6, 87-100. 
Brewer, B. W. (1998). Adherence to sport injury rehabilitation programs. JAppl Sport 
Psychol, 10,70-82. 
Brewer, B. W. (2001). Psychology of sport injury rehabilitation. In: Singer RN, 
Hausenblas HA, Janelle CM, eds. Handbook of sport psychology, 2nd ed. New 
York: Willey 787-809. 
Brewer. B. W. (2003). Psychology of Sport Injury Rehabilitation. Handbook of Sport 
Psychology. Ch 18, p.404 - 424 2nd Edition, New York 
Brewer, B. W., Andersen, M. B., and Van Raalte, J. L. (2002). Psychological Aspects of 
Sport Injury Rehabilitation: Toward a Biopsychosocial Aproach, in Medical and 
Psychological Aspects of Sport and Exercise. Morgantown, WV: Fitness 
Information Technology. 
Brewer, B.W., Van Raalte, Cornelius & Ptitipas (2000). Psychological Factors, 
Rehabilitation Adherence, and Rehabilitation outcome after Anterior Cruciate 
Ligament Reconstraction. Rehabilitation Psychology, 45(1), 20-37. 
103 
Briker J, & Fry, M. (2006). The influence of injured athletes' Perseptions of Social 
Support From ATCs on Their Beliefs About Rehabilitation. Journal of Sport 
rehabilitation, 15, 156-167. 
Brushoj, C, K. & Bak, K., Johannsen, h., & Fauno, P. (2007). Swimmers' painful shoulder 
arthroscopic findings and return rate to sports. Scandinavian Journal of Medicine & 
Science in Sports, 17(4), 373-377. 
Byerly, P. N., Worrell, T., Gahimer, J., Domholdt E. (1994). Rehabilitation compliance in 
an athletic training environment. JAthl Train, 29, 352-355. 
Eklund, R. C, and Bianco, T. (2004). Psychological considerations in injury rehabilitation 
in clinical settings. L. Le Mura, & S. P. von Duvillard (Eds.), Clinical exercise 
physiology: Aplication and physiological principles. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott, 
Williams & Wilkins. P.593 
Ferrell, M. C. (1999). The spine in swimming. Clinics in Sports Medicine 18(2): 
Flint, F. A. (1998). Integrating sport psychology and sports medicine in research: The 
dilemmas. Journal of Applied Sport Psychology, 10(1), 83-102. 
Fowler, P. J. & Regan W. D. (1986). Swimming injuries of the knee, foot and ankle, 
elbow, and back. Clinics in sports medicine^ 5(1), 139-148. 
Grote, K., T. L. Lincoln, & Gamble (2004). Hip adductor injury in competitive swimmers. 
American Journal of Sports Medicine, 32(1), 104-108. 
Johnson, U. (1997). Coping strategies among long-term injured competitive athletes. A 
study of 81 men and women in team and individual sports. Scandinavian Journal of 
Medicine & Science in Sports, 7(6), 367-372. 
104 
Lazarus, R.S., & Folkman, S. (1984). Stress, Appraisal and Coping. New York: Springer. 
Lazarus RS. (1991)"Emotion and Adaptation. London": Oxford University Press. 
Leaderbetter W.B. (1992). "Cell-matrix response in tendon injury". Clinics in Sports 
Medicine, 11,561-562. 
Lewis-Griffith, L. (1982). Athletic injuries can be a pain in the head too. Women's Sport, 
4 (4), 44. 
Maffulli, N., Pintoore, E. (1990). Intensive training in young athletes, British journal of 
Sport Medicine, 24(4), 237-239. 
Magra, M., Caine, D., & Mafulli, N. (2007). A review of epidemiology of pediatric elbow 
injuries in sports. Sports Medicine, 37(8): 717-735. 
McFarland EG, Wasik M. (1996) Injuries in female collegiate swimmers due to swimming 
and cross training. Clin J Sports Med, 6, 178-82. 
McMaster, W. C. (1996). Swimming injuries -An overview. Sports Medicine 22(5), 332-
336. 
McMaster, W. C. (1999). Shoulder injuries in competitive swimmers. Clinics in Sports 
Medicine 18(2): 349-348. 
McMaster, W. C. & Troup, J. (1993). A survey of interfering shoulder pain in Unites 
States competitive swimmers. The American Journal Of Sport Medicine 21, 67-70 
Nixon, H. (1992) A social network analysis of influences on athletes to play with pain and 
injuries. Journal of Sport & Social Issues, 16(2), 127-135. 
Nixon, H. (1994). Coaches views of risk, pain, and injury in sport, with special reference to 
gender difference. Sociology of sport journal, 11, 79-87. 
105 
O'Donnell, C. J., J. Bowen, et al. (2005). "Identifying and managing shoulder pain in 
competitive swimmers - How to minimize training flaws and other risks." 
Physician and Sportsmedicine, 33(9): 27-35. 
Pollard, B. (2001). The Prevalence of Shoulder Pain in Elite Level British Swimmers and 
the Effects of Training Technique. British Swimming Coaches & Teachers 
Association. 
Podlog, L., Eklund, R. (2006). A longitudinal investigation of competitive athletes' return 
to sport following serious injury. Journal of Applied Sport Psychology. 18(1) 44-
68. 
Podlog, L. , Eklund, R.(2007a). Professional coaches' perspective on the return to sport 
following serious injury. Journal of Applied Sport Psychology, 19(2), 207-225. 
Podlog, L., Eklund, R. (2007b). The psychosocial aspects of a return to sport following 
serious injury: A review of the literature from a self-determination perspective. 
Psychology of Sport and Exercise, 8, 535-566. 
Quackenbush, & Crossman (1994). Injured athletes: A study of emotional responses. 
Journal of Sport Behavior, 17, 
Rodeo, A. S. (1999). Knee pain in competetive swimming.Clinics in sports medicine, 
18(2), 379-387. 
Rovere, G. D., Nichols, A. W. (1985). Frequency, associated factors, and treatment of 
breaststroker's knee in competitive swimmers. Am J Sports Med, 13(March), 99-
104. 
106 
Ryan, R. M. and Deci, E. L. (2000). Self-determination theory and the facilitation of 
intrinsic motivation, social development, and well-being. American Psychologist, 
55(1), 68-78. 
Sallis, R., Jones, k., Sunshine, S., Smith, G., Simon, L. (2001). Comparing Sports Injuries 
in Men and Women. International journal of Sports Medicine, 22, 420-423. 
Smith AM, Scott S, O'Fallon W, Young M. (1990). Emotional responses of athletes to 
injury. Mayo Clin Proc, 65, 38-50. 
Sporting Goods Manufacturers Association (2008). 2008 Sports and Fitness Participation 
Report. Washington, D.C.; SGMA. 
Taylor AH, May S. (1996). Threat and coping appraisal as determinants of compliance 
with sports injury rehabilitation: an application of protection motivation theory. 
J Sports Sci, 14,471-482. 
Taylor J, Taylor S. (1997). Psychological Approaches to Sports Injury Rehabilitation. 
Gaithersburg, Md: Aspen Press. 
Udry, E. (1997). Coping and social support among injured athletes following surgery. 
Journal of sport & Exercise Psychology, 19, 71-90. 
Udry, E., Andersen, MB. (2002.) Athletic injury and sport behaviour. In: Horn TS, ed. 
Advances in sport psychology, 2nd ed. Champaign, III: Human Kinetics, 529-543. 
Wiese-Bjornstal, D. M., A. M. Smith, et al. (1998). An integrated model of response to 
sport injury: Psychological and sociological dynamics. Journal of Applied Sport 
Psychology, 10(1), 46-69. 
Wolf, B. R., Ebinger, A. E., Lawler, M. P., & Britton, C. L. (2009). Injury Patterns in 
Division 1 Collegiate Swimming, American Journal of Sport Medicine, 24, 1-6. 
Young, K., White, P., & McTeer, W. (1994). Body talk: Male athletes reflect on sport, 
injury and pain. Sociology of Sport Journal, 11, 175-194. 
108 
Appendix A: Letter of Information and Informed Consent for Athletes 
Letter of Information and Informed Consent for Athletes 
A study entitled "Examining varsity swimmers' injuries: Prevalence, severity, coach perceptions and coach 
efficacy" is being conducted at York University. The principle researcher is Alisa Abgarov, a Master's 
student in the School of Kinesiology and Health Science. 
The purpose of the research project is to examine the prevalence and severity of injuries among varsity 
swimmers in Ontario universities. We will also be comparing athletes' and coaches' perceptions of injuries 
and trying to understand the relationship between athletes' injuries and coaches' efficacy. 
We are inviting all of the coaches and athletes of varsity programs to participate, however your participation 
is entirely voluntary. Your participation would be extremely helpful and greatly appreciated. 
Requirements of the Participant 
The participant agrees to answer a questionnaire that will take 5-15 minutes to complete. 
Risks 
There are no known physical, psychological, economic, or social risks associated with participation in this 
study. Participants may refuse to answer any questions that they find objectionable. Participants may 
withdraw from the study at any time by emailing "stop participation" to alisaabg@yorku.ca.Refusal to 
participate or withdrawal from this study at any time will in no way affect participants' treatment on their 
team or within their sport organization. 
Confidentiality/Anonymity 
The data obtained from the questionnaire will be stored in a secure location that will be accessible to only the 
principal researcher. The questionnaires and the consent forms will be stored in a locked file cabinet and 
electronic data stored on a computer which will require a password to access. The results of the study may be 
published in academic journals and presented at conferences in which case identities of those who 
participated in the study will be protected. 
Other Information 
All participants in this study will be provided with a summary of the study's results upon request. 
Further questions, comments or complaints regarding this study can be addressed by the principal researcher 
or the academic advisor at the addresses below. This protocol has been approved by the Research Ethics 
Board in the School of Kinesiology & Health Science. If you have questions regarding the ethical nature of 
the research, you may contact Dr. Joe Baker 416 736 2100 Ext. 22361 or bakerj(S>,yorku.ca 
Alisa Abgarov - Principal Researcher Jessica Fraser Thomas, PhD 
Masters Candidate Assistant professor - Academic Advisor 
School of Kinesiology and Health Science School of Kinesiology and Health Science 
York University, Ontario York University, Ontario 
E-mail - alisaabg(o),vorku.ca E-mail - ift(£;vorku,ca 
Phone - 416 736 2100 Ext 20229 or 416 823 0309 (cell phone) Phone - 416 736 2100 Ext 20952 
I, , (print full name) have read the information above and 
understand the proposed study. I consent to taking part in this study. 
Signature: Date: 
If you would like a copy of the study results please provide us with an e-mail address and we will forward the 
information to you once study is complete. 
Thank you for your participation in this study. 
109 
Appendix B: Athlete questionnaire 
Athlete Questionnaire 
Section 1: Demographic Information 
1. First name: 
2. Last name: 
3. Gender: Male / Female 
4. Date of birth: 
5. Telephone number: 
6. E-mail address: 
(We request your phone number and e-mail address in case we need to clarify any information in the 
questionnaire; otherwise you will not be contacted.) 
7. University: 
8. How old were you when you first started competitive swimming? 
9. Have you ever taken time off from competitive swimming? Yes / No 
If yes: a) At what age? 
b) For how long? Years: Months: 
c) Reason: time conflict, injury, personal, other (circle all appropriate) 
Section 2: Career History of Injuries and Pain 
1. Have you ever experienced location-specific pain or injury during or as a result of swimming 
that you did not consider to be general muscle fatigue? <before the start of this season 2007-2008> 
Yes / No 
If yes, please complete the table below. 
Injury Location Age First Occurred Age Healed? 
If Applicable Report to my coach at 
that time? 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
110 
Section 3: Injuries at the Start of this Season 
1. Did you start this (2007-2008) season with any swimming related injuries? Yes / No 
If yes, please fill in the table below with details of each injury. 
Swimming Season 
Number of injuries 
Injury diagnosis / 
description of the injury 
Sudden injury or gradual 
onset of injury? 
Did you need to take 
medication to treat the 
injury? 
If yes, which medication? 
Average dosage? 
Do you still need to treat 
your injury (eg. take 
medications, see 
professionals or do 
rehabilitation exercises)? 
If yes, elaborate. 
Did you report your injury 
to your Head Coach? 
Did you report your injury 
to your Assistant Coach? 
Did you see a family 
doctor for this injury? 
If yes, how many visits? 
Did you see a sports 
medicine physician for this 
injury? 
If yes, how many visits? 
Did you see a 
physiotherapist or athletic 
therapist for this injury? 
If yes, how many visits? 
Did you see an 
acupuncturist for this 
injury? 
If yes, how many visits? 
Did you see any other 
health professionals who 
were not listed above? If 
yes, specify. 
If yes, how many visits? Start of 2007-
2008 season 
Injury #1 
sudden / gradual 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no Start of 2007-
2008 season 
Injury #2 
sudden / gradual 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no Start of 2007-
2008 season 
Injury #3 
sudden / gradual 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no Start of 2007-
2008 season 
Injury #4 
sudden / gradual 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
Ill 
Section 4: Injuries Incurred During this Season 
1. Have you incurred any swimming related injuries during this swimming season? Yes / No 
If yes, please fill out the table below with details of each injury. 
Swimming Season 
Number of injuries 
Injury diagnosis / 
description of the injury 
Pain intensity: 
(0-no pain at all 
9-strongest pain you ever 
experienced) 
Do you still experience pain 
in the region? 
Sudden injury or gradual 
onset of injury? 
How many workouts did 
you miss as result of this 
injury? 
Did you need to take time 
off? If Yes, how much time 
in weeks months 
Did you need to take 
medication to treat the 
injury? If yes, which med.? 
Average dosage? 
Do you still need to treat 
your injury (eg. take 
medications, see 
professionals or do rehab, 
exercises)? If yes, elaborate. 
Did you report your injury to 
your Head Coach? 
Did you report your injury to 
your Assistant Coach? 
Did you see a family doctor 
for this injury? 
If yes, how often? 
Did you see a sports 
medicine physician for this 
injury? If yes, how often? 
Did you see a 
physiotherapist or athletic 
therapist for this injury? 
If yes, how often? 
Did you see an acupuncturist 
for this injury? 
If yes, how often? 
Did you see any other health 
professionals who were not 
listed above? If yes, specify. 
If yes, how often? Start of 2007-
2008 season 
Injury #1 
11.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9] 
yes / no 
sudden / 
gradual 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no Start of 2007-
2008 season 
Injury #2 
|1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9| 
yes / no 
sudden/ 
gradual 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no Start of 2007-
2008 season 
Injury #3 
[1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.91 
yes / no 
sudden/ 
gradual 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no Start of 2007-
2008 season 
Injury #4 
11.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9) 
yes / no 
sudden/ 
gradual 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
yes / no 
112 
Section 5: Continued Swimming Involvement 
1. Did you complete the swimming season this year? Yes / No 
If no, state your reason for discontinuing: time conflict, injury, personal, other (circle all 
applicable) 
2. If you stopped swimming due to injury, please elaborate: 
Follow-Up 
We are interested in conducting a follow-up study in the 2008-2009 swimming season with injured 
swimmers and their coaches. If you were to incur an injured next season, would you be interested in being 
involved in the follow-up study? Yes / No 
Thank you for answering the questionnaire. Your contribution is much appreciated. 
113 
Appendix C: Flow diagram of athlete progression through the study 
LOGISTIC 
REGRESSION 
SAMPLE 
n=52 
(F=23. M=29) ONTARIO REG'D 
VARSITY SWIMMERS 
OUA PARTICIPANTS 
(STUDY POPULATION) 
STUDY 
PARTICIPANTS 
MALE= 
NO NO 
NOT INJURED AT 
SEASON START 
2 
n=63 
(F=29, M=36) 
INJURED DURING 
SEASON 
YES 
n=13 
(F=6, M=7) n=374 
(F=209. M=165) 
n=289 
(F=162. M=127) 
n=170 
(F=92. M=78) 
HISTORY OF 
INJURY DROP OUT BEFORE 
END OF SEASON 
n=85 
(F=47. M=38) 
YES 
NO 
n=30 
(F=15, M=15) 
INJURED DURING 
SEASON 
NO 
n=9 
(F=7, M=2) n=105 
(F=63. M=42) 
INJURED AT 
SEASON START YES 
n 
(F=48. 
YES 
n=21 
(F=8, M=13) =75 
M=27) 
114 
Appendix D: Gender-specific and gender-mixed descriptive results of logistic regression 
analysis variables. 
Population 
Age 
Age Start Swimming 
Years In Competitive Swimming 
Took Time Off from Swimming 
At What Age Took Time Off 
No Break 
0.5 Years 
Duration of Break 1.5 Years 
2.5 Years 
3+ Years Male 
N=78 (45.9%) 
Mean = 20.8 SD=1.87 
Mean =10.94 SD=3.97 
N = 9.87 SD = 4.24 
YES = 33N (42.3%) 
Mean =16.63 SD = 2.85 
N = 46 (59.0%) 
N= 16(20.5%) 
N = 8(10.3%) 
N = 3 (3.8%) 
N = 5 (6.4%) Female 
N=92(54.1%) 
Mean = 20.24 SD=2.16 
Mean = 9.70 SD=2.93 
N= 10.79 SD = 3.13 
YES = 43N (46.7%) 
Mean =16.44 SD = 2.46 
N = 49 (53.3%) 
N = 13 (14.1%) 
N= 10(10.9%) 
N = 13 (14.1%) 
N = 7 (7.6%) Male + Female 
N=170 
Mean = 20.6 SD=1.76 
Mean =10.27 SD=3.50 
N = 10.36 SD = 3.70 
YES = 76N (44.7%) 
Mean =16.52 SD = 2.61 
N = 94 (55.90%) 
N = 29 (17.05%) 
N= 18(10.60%) 
N= 16(9.40%) 
N= 12(7.10%) 
115 
Appendix E: Results of t-tests examining gender differences on logistic regression 
analysis variables. 
Group Statistics 
Gender 
AgeStartCompetetive Male 
Swimming Female 
Years_Swimming Male 
Female 
TookTimeOff Male 
Female 
HadHistoryOflnjury_1 Male 
Female N 
49 
44 
48 
44 
49 
44 
49 
44 Mean 
11.35 
10.27 
11.27 
9.84 
1.61 
1.50 
1.69 
1.66 Std. Deviation 
4.328 
2.872 
3.601 
4.275 
.492 
.506 
.466 
.479 Std. Error 
Mean 
.618 
.433 
.520 
.644 
.070 
.076 
.067 
.072 
Independent Samples Test 
AgeStartCompetelive Equal variances 
Swimming assumed 
Equal variances 
nol assumed 
Yeafs_Swimmmg Equal vanances 
assumed 
Equal variances 
not assumed 
TookTimeOff Equal variances 
assumed 
Equal variances 
not assumed 
HadHistoiyOflnjury_1 Equal variances 
assumed 
Equal variances 
nol assumed Levene's Test for 
Equalrty of Variances 
F 
5.784 
1.136 
2285 
.496 Sig. 
018 
.289 
.134 
.483 t-test for Equality of Means 
t 
1 393 
1.423 
1.740 
1.727 
1.084 
1.082 
.355 
.354 df 
91 
84.059 
90 
84.443 
91 
89.351 
91 
89 298 Siq. (2-tatled) 
.167 
158 
085 
088 
.281 
282 
724 
.724 Mean 
Drfference 
1.074 
1.074 
1.430 
1.430 
112 
.112 
.035 
035 Std. Error 
Difference 
.771 
.755 
.822 
.828 
104 
.104 
098 
.098 95% Confidence 
Interval of the 
Difference 
Lower 
-.457 
-.427 
-203 
-.216 
-.093 
.094 
-.160 
-.160 Upper 
2.606 
2.575 
3.063 
3.076 
.318 
318 
.230 
.230 
116 
Appendix F: Letter of information and informed consent-study 2 
Letter of Information and Informed Consent 
A study entitled "Injury in varsity swimmers: Exploring athletes' rehabilitation experiences" is being 
conducted at York University. The principle researcher is Alisa Abgarov, a Master's student in the School of 
Kinesiology and Health Science. The purpose of the research project is to gain understanding of athletes' 
experiences going through the injury process. We are inviting athletes of varsity programs to participate. 
Your participation would be extremely helpful and greatly appreciated; however your participation is entirely 
voluntary. Unfortunately we cannot offer any incentives for your participation 
Requirements of the Participant: Participants will be asked to complete a short questionnaire that will take 10 
minutes, and then engage in one-on-one interview that will take approximately 45-60 minutes to complete. 
Risks/ Benefits: There are no anticipated physical, psychological, economic, or social risks or benefits 
associated with participation in this study. Participants may withdraw from the study or refuse to answer any 
questions that they find objectionable. Refusal to participate or withdrawal from this study at any time will in 
no way affect participants' treatment on their team or within their sporting organization. 
Confidentiality/Anonymity: The data obtained from the interview will be stored in a secure location that will 
be accessible only to the principal researcher. The interview recordings will be stored in a locked file cabinet 
and/or on a password protected computer. Consent forms will be stored in a locked file cabinet. The results 
of the study may be published in academic journals and presented at conferences in which case identities of 
those who participated in the study will be protected. If at any time you no longer wish to continue as a 
participant, you may withdraw freely without penalty of any kind. In such case, all data that you have 
provided to that point will be destroyed. Collected data will be stored for 7 years in a locked cabinet; after the 
7 years all hard copy information will be shredded and all the digital files will be erased. 
Other Information: All participants in this study will be provided with a summary of the study's results upon 
request. This protocol has been reviewed and approved by the Human Participants Subcommittee (HPRC) of 
York University. If you have any further questions, comments or concerns regarding this study, please 
contact the principal researcher, the academic advisor, the Graduate Program Office, or the Manager of 
Office of Research Ethics, York University, 309 York Lanes, phone 416-736-5914. 
Alisa Abgarov. MSc Candidate Jessica Fraser Thomas, PhD Graduate Program Office 
Masters Candidate - Principal Researcher Assist. Prof. - Academic Advisor York University, Ont. 
School of Kinesiology School of Kinesiology 341 Bethune College 
and Health Science and Health Science 
York University, Ontario York University, Ontario Phone - 416-736-5728 
E-mail - alisaabg@yorku.ca E-mail - jfttSiyorku.ca 
Phone - 416-736-2100 Ext 22975 Phone - 416-736-2100 Ext 20952 
I, , have read and understand the information above regarding the 
proposed study. 
Signed: Date: 
Signature of Principal Researcher: Date: 
Thank you for your participation in this study 
If you would like a copy of the results please provide us an electronic mailing address and we will forward 
the information to you once study is complete: 
117 
Appendix G: Quantitative questionnaire-study 2 
Demographic Survey 
Name: 
Address: 
Telephone: Email: 
What is your date of birth? (dd/mm/yy) 
How many siblings do you have? 
List your siblings' gender, date of birth, and sport involvement. 
1. M/F Date of Birth: 
Sports: 
Swimming: Yes / No Age they started? (dd/mm/yy) 
2. M/F Date of Birth: 
Sports: 
Swimming: Yes / No Age they started? (dd/mm/yy) 
3. M/F Date of Birth: 
Sports: 
Swimming: Yes / No Age they started? (dd/mm/yy) 
M / F Date of Birth: 
Sports: 
Swimming: Yes / No Age they started? (dd/mm/yy) 
118 
As a child, who did you live with? (Circle all that apply) 
Mother Father Step Mother Step Father 
Other: 
If your living arrangement changed before university, please specify below: 
During university did you live with (Circle all that apply) 
Mother Father Step Mother Step Father Alone Roommate 
Other: 
If you lived with a roommate, were they involved in: (Circle all that apply) 
No sport involvement Swimming other sport: 
Did your roommate have a swimming background?_ 
Did you live at? Home On Campus Off Campus 
If your arrangement changed throughout university please specify details below: 
(discuss only university years) 
Distance from your university to your university varsity training facility: Km 
Was training facility on the same campus as your classes? Yes / No 
If no, specify distance in kilometres: Km 
119 
3. Athlete Information 
10. At what age did you start swimming? 
11. At what age did you start competitive swimming? 
12. Have you ever taken time off from competitive swimming? Yes/No 
If yes: a) At what age? 
b) For how long? Years: Months: 
c) Reason: time conflict, injury, personal, (circle all appropriate) 
other 
13. Have you ever suffered from a swimming related injury or pain? Yes / No 
If yes, please complete the table below. 
Location Injury / Pain Age First Occurred Age Healed 
4. Varsity Information 
1. Program of Study: 
2. Did/do you hold a part time/full time job during the swimming seasons? Yes / No 
Please discuss details regarding volume of your work below: 
3. Did you receive scholarships / OSAP to support your education? Yes / No 
4. What kind of financial support you had during your university years? 
5. At this time, how many eligibility years have you used for varsity swimming? 
6. Did you swim continuously or did you take time off during varsity: Yes / No 
Provide brief explanation for your rationale: 
Appendix H: Interview guide 
Interview Guide: 
Background - Swimming and Injury 
1. Tell be a little bit about yourself 
a. Can you talk me through your sport involvement as a child 
i. Adolescent 
ii. Young adult 
2. How did you get involved in swimming? 
a. When did you start swimming? 
b. Why did you start? (influence of Parents, siblings, other) 
Swimming Participation: <Using supplement questionnaire sheets> 
I want to talk specifically about swimming now ... 
PART l<swimming progress> 
1. Did you take swimming lessons? 
a. For how long? 
b. How fast did you progress through the levels? 
2. At what age did you joined the swimming team? 
a. How did you progress through the swimming team levels? 
3. Did you swimming for your school swim team? 
a. When? 
b. Which grades? 
4. When did you start dry land training? 
a. What did you do in your dry land training 
(E.g. running, body weight exercise, shoulder stability, weight room, yoga etc.) 
5. Have you had breaks from swimming throughout childhood? 
a. When? 
b. Why? 
c. For how long? 
PART 2 <level of involvement> (Frequency Time Type) 
1. Talk to me about your level of involvement at each stage.(intensity of workouts) 
a. On average, how often did you swim? Workouts per week 
b. On average, how long were your workouts? 
d. On average, how much dry land were you doing? 
i. What kind of dry land have you been doing in that stage? 
122 
PART 3 <Iniurv background> If you were in varsity ^incorporate main section questions 
1. Tell me about the first time you felt chronic pain (or injury) in your joint? <Shoulder, 
Knee, other> 
For each injury please tell me: 
a. How old were you at that time? 
b. In what team were you in? 
c. Did you consider the pain as an injury? 
e. How long did the injury last for? 
f. How did you treat it? 
g. Did you take time off? 
i. In your opinion, was that break necessary? 
ii. What did you do during that break? 
h. What aggravated the sensation of pain? 
i. Was it worse swimming particular strokes? 
ii. Was it worse when using equipment? 
iii. Did your sleeping posture made it worse? 
iv. Was there anything else that aggravated the sensation of pain or 
discomfort? 
2. Did the pain affect you in any other way? 
a. Did it affect your life outside of swimming? 
(E.g. School concentration, Agitation as result of lack of sleep) 
3. Did you tell your coach or assistant coach about the injury? 
If yes: 
a. What did you tell them? 
b. What did they say? 
c. Did you train through your injury? 
d. Were your workouts modified? 
e. How did the modifications make you feel? 
If no: 
a. Why not? 
4. How did you feel during the recovery process? 
a. How was your swimming experience during that period? 
i. Can you elaborate with examples about your overall experience? 
ii. Did you get frustrated with anyone? <Coach, teammates, parents, friends, 
yourself?> 
iii. Was there anything that made you frustrated? <Training modification, 
pain etc> 
b. How much time did the process of recovery lasted? 
c. Did you feel relapses of those pain sensations after you healed? When? 
i. What caused the relapses in your opinion? 
d. Can you say that you felt that you have healed from that injury? 
f. Did you tell anyone else about your pain and or injury? 
i. Who did you share it with? <parents, siblings, coach, teammates> 
5. Did you see anyone for this pain? 
If yes: 
a. What did they say it was? 
b. What kind of suggestions you were given on how to deal with the pain? 
i. To what extend did you follow their advice? 
If no: Why didn't you see anyone for this pain? 
Main questions - Injury during varsity years 
1. How has your health been during the university swimming years? 
a. Have you got any injuries? What were they? 
b. Have you had any chronic joint pain? Where? 
2. Tell me about each specific injury during your varsity swimming career 
a. When did you realize that you were injured? 
b. How did you discover that you are injured? 
i. When did you realize that your pain was not normal? 
ii. How were these injuries incurred? 
c. Did you have a relapse of your injury? 
d. Can you share with me the emotions that you felt at that time? 
3. Did you have access to medical care during the varsity years? 
a. What kind? (Family doctor, Specialists doctor, Physiotherapist/ athletic therapist, 
Massage therapist, Acupuncture, Chiropractor, Sport psychologist, Other) 
b. Did you use these services when you were injured? 
If yes: 
i. What was your experience like? 
ii. Can you give me specific examples? 
iii. Have you shared your emotions about the injury process with them? 
If yes 
a. How did you find their feedback? 
b. How did you feel about sharing those emotions? 
c. Can you share with me the emotions that you felt at that time? 
If no: 
a. Why not? 
c. Did you use any other services to help yourself during injury process? 
d. Looking back, is there anything you would do differently in training or 
rehabilitation? 
4. What strategies did you use to help yourself through the rehabilitation process? 
a. What motivated you during the rehabilitation process? 
b. Did you meet with a sport psychologist? 
i. And did you discussed and learned about 
a. Learned goal setting 
b. Learned imagery 
c. Learned self-talk 
d. Confidence 
e. other 
c. Did you receive other emotional support during the injury process? 
i. From who? 
ii. How did they help support you? 
d. Did you set goals? 
i. What were your goals? 
ii. To what extent were you able to achieve these goals? 
iii. Looking back, do you feel that your goals were realistic? 
e. Did you stop swimming? 
124 
If yes: 
i. Why did you stop? 
ii. What did you do during that time? 
1. Did you continue to rehabilitate your injury? 
2. Did you communicate with your family, friends, coach, etc. that you stopped 
swimming? 
i. How did they respond? 
ii. How did it feel sharing that information? 
iii. Did you still experience pain during the break? 
a. How did that affect your life? 
i. Did it affect you academic performance? 
If yes: 
1. In which way did it affect you? <attention levels, 
motivation, depression, relief, anxiety, 
2. Can you elaborate on that with few examples? 
If no: 
i. Why did you decide to train through the injury? 
ii. How did it feel training while injured? 
iii. Where you encouraged to continue to train? 
iv. Did you use any other strategies? 
5. What is your current sport status? 
1. Do you feel that your injury is still affecting your life? (within swimming, outside 
swimming?) 
a. In which way? 
b. Do you feel that you are recovered? 
2. What is your participation level in swimming now? 
a. Do your past injuries still affect your participation? 
If yes: 
1. How do your past injuries affect you those days? 
3. What is your participation in other physical activity right now? 
Wrap-up: 
Thank you for sharing your experiences 
1. Do you have any additional questions? 
2. Do you want to elaborate on any thing we discussed earlier? 
a. In the topics of past injuries or pains 
b. Experiences during the injury rehabilitation 
i. Any interesting stories that you have remembered? 
ii. Any emotions regarding those experiences? 
c. The decision to take time off from sport and its effect on you? 
d. Present sport participation, 
i. The effect of your past injuries on your current sport participation 
1. What will you do if you experience pain? 
3. What did you think about the interview? 
4. Did you enjoy the experience? 
Appendix I: Supplementary table- Qualitative interview 125 
Swim Level / Age | 
Age At that time Fall 
Winter 
Spring 
Summer 
Fall 
Winter 
Sprinq 
Summer 
Fall 
Winter 
Spring 
Summer 
Fall 
Winter 
Sprinq 
Summer 
Fall 
Winter 
Spring 
Summer 
Fall 
Winter 
Spring 
Summer 
Fall 
Winter 
Spring 
Summer 1 
1 2 
2 3 
3 4 
4 5 
5 6 
6 7 
7 8 
8 9 
9 10 
10 11 
11 12 
12 13 
13 14 
14 15 
15 16 
16 17 
17 18 
18 19 
19 20 
20 21 
21 22 
22 23 
23 24 
24 25 
25 26 
26 27 
27 28 
28 29 
29 30 
30 31 
31 32 
32 33 
33 34 
34 35 
35 36 
36 37 
37 38 
38 39 
39 40 
40 
Appendix J: Training Volume Throughout Swimming Career and Injury Patterns for Participant 1 
1 -——- 1 1 --------
age age age age age age Sge Sge Sge 5 g E age age Sgl 
n>E3n>P3n-,Q3n!>C13t5>C3mi.CIlffli.03rt~,e3rai.C3n>P3nJiC3ns.n=Irai.CI 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 •"" "••"•"•""""""•"• 
X O "J3 .2 
.£• T u "c '"% 
___:: ^M'M M •§ ^ .2 | 3 
Q •§ .§ 
55 •£ *S 
-,-S J 
•SE sgE S»E Sg| S g1 6»E Sg| S g g »SE S g E SgE «gE 626 
=E:E=E=E=E=E:ECE=E=E=ECE=S:E=E;6=S=E=E:E=E=E=E=E:=EE 
14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 
AGE 
Appendix J: Training Volume Throughout Swimming Career and Injury Patterns for Participant 2 
SgS 2g! 2gE SgE SgE S^E jjgE £gl H £ E § g E $££ H £ E SgE 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 ........................ 
c 
i^ 
u 
---.-... 3 
""" 2 
" c £ £ OT 
........ ^ ^^ ^ 
1 -1 -^ £ •••" w 2 r « C fS -M « U <" •- J 
* « Hi O (U 
SgE S»E 2gE 2gE S g B 2gE SgE SgE 2 g 1 2 g E 2gE « g E 2 g E 
==CE=ECE=E!E=ECE=E=E===E==CE=SCE=E=E=E=E=SCE=EEE=E=E 
14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 
AGE 
Appendix J: Training Volume Throughout Swimming Career and Injury Patterns for Participant 3 
i!) y 
14 y 
n ^ i-> t_ 
n ... ... -12 --- --- £ 
n J ii ^ J 
in ... — -o -^ 
9 3 
. ', _ wi 
Sgi £££ §SE §£E g«i a«| fi g e Sge £ g £ bgg 5JE SSEI B^E ££E ££E £ £ E §£E Sge S^E £ £ E Sge S^E S^E S«E SHE £ g E 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 
AGE 
Appendix J: Training Volume Throughout Swimming Career and Injury Patterns for Participant 4 
in ' ' ' ' l JU l I 1 • 
9Q -L -4- J-
z® i 
l"... mmmmmZZmmmm mmmmm " 1Q -,-
n o 
1J ° iz • «—.....—-. .....—- _ .... 
11 -^ 
10 -1- cd •£ 
q c 
.„?.„.„ — T3 
„. „* ••••---- g 
7 T 
,,.:._. 6 •§ 
s ^ J O 
•r « 
2 -r -+- ^ 
1 -T- .——.."•• -,-
2gE Sgl S gl SSE SgE »gl SgE SgE SgE SgE SgE !?E 2 g E S g S •?£ « g 1 SgE SgE SgE SgE SEE « g £ S 2 E SgE s g S SgE =Egg=E|§=E=E=Sg|=E|E=E=E=5cE=E§g=E=E=EC|=EcE=EcE=E=|=EcE=^ 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 
AGE 
Appendix J: Training Volume Throughout Swimming Career and Injury Patterns for Participant 5 
^ III 1X1 
<: Qi 
LLl Q_ 
OH 
O X 1 
Sgi $££ a=£ £=•£ §£E fige Sg£ £ £ £ S£E £ g E agi £ £ E £ £ E 
n->03fl:^QZira->.Q3c3>P303>El3m>0.3f1i03fl;,03ra:,Q3ffl:>Q3ra3.Ei:Jffli.Q:imi.G = 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
AGE """"" 
i_ 
3 
O 
C/J 
£gE £££ 2g£ £gE £g£ £gl £ £ E £g£ £"£ £™E «g£ £ £ £ gwg 
:EcEs£EEsEcE:EEE:£cEsEcE:EcE:ScE=SEE=EcE:icE:EcE=EcE 
14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 
Appendix J: Training Volume Throughout Swimming Career and Injury Patterns for Participant 6 
15 « 
Tl . °A ^ L r„ 
91 _l_ X P 
_ _!_?., "si a 
14 ' (£1 _ _ _ -
n ? - - - -.'•* s 
1" "^ r~r« i-i~"i -•• 
in ._ ... „..._.__. _. __ 
^ 
£c£ B " E 2ic£ HcE 2 c E S^E Sc- HcE 2 = E 2c£ SeE ScE £ c E HcE ScE 2 c E H = E ScE 2?E 5 = E § = £ ScE 2rE £ c E S = E »cE 
=EEE=£cE=EcE=5cfi=He£=£cE=EEE=EeE=Sc£=EcE=EEE=EcE=ScE=EcE=EeE=5cE=EcE=ScE=EcE=EEE=S 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 
AGE 
Appendix J: Training Volume Throughout Swimming Career and Injury Patterns for Participant 7 
1 
I -»»---.- « | •-----•••! 
S^s Sgs S g s «^E SgE S^i SgE S^E i 
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 1 
CO 
D. en 
p a °? o 
- « o-
3 =0 
g | 
4S C 
-J- V'S _i_ 
"TT'T-
TT 
... ... -L o "S a; § 
3 8 
k ____ ___ ____ „.__ 'S <*! 
... ... j^ts 
gE 2E-6 sgl S g 8 S?E sgE sgl Sgi Sgl SgE sgl Sg E SgE S 2 
0 3n^a3n>n3re>D3a>Q3n>a3ra>D3a>a = a^Q3re-.D3a>fi3n>can>D3ra>Q 
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 J L 
= S?E SgE sg£ »?E 
E:£=E=EL£=£:E=£CE 
23 24 25 26 
AGE 
39V 
IF 
f S3 
fl 3 
g n n iii 
5 = 3 
' 1 1 iLU^ 
• • • ! ' • : 1 1 
3 3i 
31 £ 
r § W 
* B-
3 
•8 
5 
—" § W Ot 6T 81 L\ 
c' g * M s o * M c' o 5 s> c a 
|H 3§S {3S |3 
5 era' 
*S * 
1-1. _I _i !____. 
3 
3' _ . 91 SI 
il 
Is 
r H £1 21 II 
S g S S g3S g 3 5 |M |3S 
• ^^ ^, 
"r 01 6 8 L 
eP * J c' B * J E 8 * « | 5 
I a 5 ' 
t-L £-I m it 9 S 
Hi 5 = B 
3 | 
Tmt fr £ 
f J I 
3 a § | "5 I? 
, : ! 
T T 
— 
r 
,, 
8 jiredpijiej; JOJ SIUSUBJ Xinfiq pire isare^ gmuruixM.s jtioijSnoiqx sump A Sutureix :f xiptraddy 
Appendix J: Training Volume Throughout Swimming Career and Injury Patterns for Participant 9 
_l 
_j_ • 
:i|l 
v 11 gl SS 
U 2 3 m 4 [ 5 u 1x1 I XL is! saS sg| . 
8 9 10 :|:!!t 
fi _i 
. 
iil 11? 12? 13 I 14 | _i 
*~ 
IT 
•s 
•M 
g 
S3 B^ 
S-B 
S? & 
35 I/J 
3~~r 
! 
ULn isTisi ;~": 
&* 
*M 
! J £ 3 X« i ; ' ' 
£H ill * s 
5^ U OS K 
1 ! 1 
r 
• . • ' , 1 i ' : ' 1 , • ' 
J 01 S ,_ 6 ^ 5 ^ S 
S Sg| |gg ggg 3(0>.Q3fl>Q3(9a.O3 
17 18 19 20 1 21 til i I T 22 f 23 I 24 | 25 
/V inter 
Summer 
26 
AGE 
Appendix J: Training Volume Throughout Swimming Career and Injury Patterns for Participant 10 
Z4 +- -+- --*--*--& 
15 - - 3 
w 
on"" _*- - i_ -tf _ 
./u,. ^ "! 
'IS *•"" — — 
e % 
. n •? 14--J- _+_ -^- H- _> _ ' ^ _ 
14 £ 
11 '*"o 
n * 
o 
-» . ... ——-••M— ^_i -^_ 
„ J 1,1 ll Pymm — 
o i_ ' i 
! *-_ta —• "^ **-- • -rr ^""- ,"rr r—7 rr-1 ' . i ' : ! ! i i . : ...,,'!. 
Sgs age Sg£ Sg1 age Sgi |gs figs £*£ ggs fcgg §gs §gi £gi 9g£ ggi £«§ s«g §gl g«i sgg ggl S«B Sgi £g£ g«| 
«^P?«>o3«>og™>Q3™>033>.03ra^Q3«>P3fl>.03rt^Q3n>Q3w>.Q3rti53ni03«JC3rt>a3»>D3m>QS«> 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 
AGE 
Appendix J: Training Volume Throughout Swimming Career and Injury Patterns for Participant 11 
' 0% - -4- " -
^ * -o ">f» <"> "3 
Z[) _l _ _(_ _g p - _+_ 
,..1,1.. "^ " -HtUpC-- -+-
,. 10 •• —•-•••-rpi 
'^,_ I _L "™ 
1-' jo 
}l ~ -*- -h- -4- jg„^_ 
11 " H "T~ " ~ ~^ v «3 " " ^- -+_ _ _4- -^ _ _ 
0 0. O 
i • 
" — —• — 
I | -M -^ »- ! : ! : ! ! 1 .'ill! 
Sge Sga Sgi Sge §»g sgg gg| tgE sge s«£ £«s gg| §«§ fc«l sg| s«l s«| §«g g«| tg| ggg gg| sgg Sgi ggs Bge 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 
AGE 
Appendix J: Training Volume Throughout Swimming Career and Injury Patterns for Participant 12 
_4 - - -- - * " ~ S 
15 - « 
LI - _____ <& 
U ^- — T •- >— 
.,1/..," " "" " " •» " " 
16 — -i - ' S " S 
13 • • «*s 3 
H •* di 
14 - -f- -h —jr- - •+- sq X 
M. -i- H- -H -H H- -i K H- -H -r—TJ *- ~h -*- -+- •+" «• n 
p n &H & 
12 -..-..._ .._..._ ^ ^ ii •* ^ K 
M -T 3 rri 
i ., •*• • 
i «i < < > ; ' ' ' : '• ' ' ' • 
1 . | . : ™" 
|g| pi Ml Pi Ml 1 = 1 Pi M§ pi p| Ml Pi 1-1 Pi Pi Pi lei p| Pi Pi Pi Pi Pi Pi pi Sal 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 
AGE 
