Original research
The role of the upper and lower limbs in
front crawl swimming: The thoughts and
practices of expert high-performance
swimming coaches
Kirstin S Morris1,2, David G Jenkins1, Mark A Osborne1,3,
Steven B Rynne1, Megan E Shephard1,2and Tina L Skinner1
Abstract
The perceptions of high-performance swimming coaches regarding the relative contribution of the upper and lower limbs
are crucial in optimising athletic performance through subsequent prescription of training. Problematically, examination
of these perspectives is lacking. T o develop knowledge in this area, perceptions regarding the upper and lower limb
velocity and metabolic contributions and reasoning surrounding whole body, arms-only and legs-only training prescrip-
tion (referred to as swim, pull and kick, respectively) were garnered from seven male expert swimming coaches. The
semi-structured interviews were transcribed verbatim by the lead researcher. Thematically analysed through open and
axial-coding, results revealed that all coaches believed the upper limbs were the primary velocity generators but placed
great importance on having well-conditioned muscles of the lower limbs. All coaches identified multiple interrelated
parameters contributing to velocity generation and metabolic cost. In a typical training week, coaches allocate, on
average, 58% (40–85%), 19% (0–30%) and 22% (10–40%) of the total training volume to swim, pull and kick training,
respectively. All training prescription was based on anecdotal evidence and personal experience. Considering the vari-
ability in training allocation reported by these high-performance coaches, sport scientists and developmental coaches are
encouraged to understand how factors such as the distance specialisation of the swimmers, injury status, stroke tech-
nique and physiological conditioning status of the upper and lower limb muscles influence the prescription of swim, pull
and kick training within a typical training season.
Keywords
Arms, athletic performance, coaching, front crawl, legs, locomotion, perceptions, training prescription
Introduction
Success in high-performance sport involves the collabor-
ation of a team of discipline-speciﬁc sport science experts
who work closely with the athlete and coach to achieve
both short- and long-term goals.1,2In swimming, for
example, the relative contributions of the upper and
lower limbs to athletic performance have been examined
through the sport science sub-disciplines of biomechan-
ics, physiology and motor control. Given the epistemo-
logical foundations of sport science, the majority of
research in this area has understandably been from a
quantitative perspective.3,4Although there is a continu-
ing debate over the precise energy cost of the upper
versus lower limbs during front crawl, there is nonethe-
less agreement that the lower limb movements require
more energy than the upper limb movements.5,6DespiteReviewers: Flavio Castro (Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul,
Brazil)
Daniel Greenwood (The University of Memphis, United
States of America)
Rodrigo Zacca (The University of Porto, Portugal)
1The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia
2Queensland Academy of Sport, Qld Sport & Athletics Centre,
Queensland, Australia
3School of Human Movement and Nutrition Sciences, Swimming
Australia Limited, Sunnybank, Queensland, Australia
Corresponding author:
Kirstin S Morris, Queensland Academy of Sport, Level 1 Western Stand,
Qld Sport & Athletics Centre, 468 Kessels Road, Nathan, Qld 4111,
Australia.
Email: Kirstin.morris@uqconnect.edu.auInternational Journal of Sports Science
& Coaching
0(0) 1–10
!The Author(s) 2019
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/1747954119866358
journals.sagepub.com/home/spo

the inconsistencies in the reported metabolic demand of
the upper and lower limbs, it is common practice for
most swimming coaches incorporate speciﬁc arms-only
(pull) and legs-only (kick) sets into their training pro-
grams. The proportion of training that is dedicated to
pull and kick is not well documented, nor is the reason-
ing behind these speciﬁc training sets. It is therefore
unknown whether the percentage of pull and kick train-
ing independently reﬂects the observations of the quan-
titative literature or whether other factors, such as the
personal beliefs of the coaches, contribute.
As suggested above, the relative contributions of the
upper and lower limbs to swimming performance and
their associated metabolic costs have primarily been
framed in discipline-speciﬁc ways (e.g. physiology) and
have been investigated using quantitative approaches.5,6
While valuable, the ﬁndings are subsequently limited
due to potential diﬃculties in understanding the context
of a particular phenomenon, thereby limiting the applic-
ability of the results within various participant groups
and/or situations. Qualitative research can generate rich
data permitting diﬀerent subjective views of a particular
phenomenon that can complement and/or be compared to
quantitative research ﬁndings.7,8Moreover, research that
moves beyond discipline-speciﬁc boundaries is more likely
to reﬂect the realities of high-performance sport, where
teams of professionals are required to work together for
shared performance gains. For example, while sport sci-
entists are considered to be professionals in their own
right, their ability to function within a broader perform-
ance team under the inﬂuence of a head coach is para-
mount.9Consequently, there is considerable potential
value in sport scientists approaching their work in ways
that are informed by high levels of discipline-speciﬁc
knowledge, as well as clear understandings of how coaches
conceptualise the components of performance.10
Honed by years of experience and reﬂection, expert
high-performance swimming coaches have highly specia-
lised and extensive foundations of declarative (knowing)
and procedural (doing) knowledge.11,12Through explor-
ation, this knowledge source presents opportunities to
enhance understanding of the relative roles of the upper
and lower limbs to swimming performance.13
Understanding successful high-performance coaches’
thoughts regarding the upper and lower limb contribu-
tions to swimming performance will assist support staﬀ
to: (i) interpret and convey the ﬁndings of scientiﬁc
research to the coach, (ii) share this knowledge within
the scientiﬁc community and (iii) provide direction for
future applied research. Lower level coaches and sports
scientists will also have a greater understanding of why
elite coaches train their swimmers the way they do and
sport scientists may then be able to provide more targeted,
evidence-based recommendations on the speciﬁc training
of the upper and lower limbs based on these practices.The purposes of the present study were to examine the
relative contributions of the upper and lower limbs to
velocity and the metabolic demand of front crawl swim-
ming from the perspectives of expert high-performance
swimming coaches. The secondary aim was to examine
how and why coaches prescribe swim, pull and
kick training and determine what resources and/or
experiences have shaped their thoughts regarding the
contributions of the limbs and how to train them.
Methods
Participants
Purposeful sampling14was used to select expert high-
performance swimming coaches; seven male coaches
were recruited for the study. While there are signiﬁcant
issues with judging coach performance based on ath-
letic outcomes, for the purposes of this research, the
coaches were considered to be ‘expert’ because they
had all coached an Olympic Medallist or had been a
National Head Coach (open water and/or pool swim-
ming events). All had been coaching national or inter-
national-level swimmers for 23.7 /C611.7 years and had
worked, or were currently working, with elite-level
athletes at the Olympic and/or international level. All
coaches had experience coaching both male and female
swimmers, and six of the seven were swimmers prior to
becoming coaches. Two of the coaches specialised in
coaching sprinters ( /C20100 m), three focused on mid-
dle distance (200–400 m) and two focused on coaching
distance swimmers ( /C21800 m). Signed informed consent
was obtained from all participants prior to the
interview commencing; the study was approved by the
Human Research Ethical Committee of The University
of Queensland.
Research design
A semi-structured interview methodology with eight
open-ended questions (Table 1) was used to explore
and elicit expert knowledge.15The interview schedule
was developed by a team of experts comprising of exer-
cise physiologists (clinical and sport speciﬁc) and
university lecturers in sports pedagogy. Given the lar-
gely exploratory nature of this investigation, semi-
structured interviews were most appropriate as they
facilitated in-depth responses and provided ﬂexibility
for the lead researcher to include additional questions,
seek further clariﬁcation and elicit speciﬁc examples.14
As such, although the progressive structure of the inter-
views was consistent, the ordering of questions varied
depending on participant responses. The researcher
conducted a pilot interview with an assistant coach
from the same high-performance program as one of2 International Journal of Sports Science & Coaching 0(0)
the participants. The feedback from this interview was
used to evaluate and improve the interview guide. All
interviews were conducted by the lead author, who had
experience as a performance science service provider at
a national level in swimming. This experience helped to
establish a rapport with the interviewees and assisted in
the interpretation of results.14
Topics discussed included the perceived importance
of the upper and lower limb actions in front crawl vel-
ocity generation, the distribution of the total available
energy to the upper and lower limbs during front crawl
swimming, potential factors that inﬂuence the velocity
contributions and energy distribution to the limbs in
front crawl and the prescription of and reasons for
whole-body (swim), pull and kick sets in training.
Interviews lasted between 23 and 48 min (med-
ian¼25.5 min) with six interviews being conducted
face-to-face in an environment chosen by the partici-
pant, and one interview being conducted via the tele-
phone. Previous research suggests that in qualitative
research, responses to interview questions are equiva-
lent whether face-to-face or via telephone.16Interviews
were recorded and transcribed verbatim by the lead
author.
Data analysis
Adopting a constructivist orientation,14data were ana-
lysed to determine, from coaches’ perspectives, the
degree to which the total swimming velocity is produced
by the upper and lower limbs, and to identify what pro-
portion of the total available energy is required by the
limbs to produce this propulsion. Data units, being the
key responses from the transcribed interviews, were the-
matically analysed to extract the underlying factors that
have the potential to inﬂuence these percentages.
Furthermore, data were analysed to understand how
and why expert coaches prescribe pull and kick training,
and identify what factors may inﬂuence the prescription
of pull and kick training.Prior to initial analysis, the interview transcripts
were read several times by the lead researcher.
Sentence-by-sentence open coding17,18was then per-
formed by the lead author to draw out raw data
themes from each coach to form the units of data
for analysis.19The properties of each category and
the inherent dimensions were also noted so as to
facilitate the next stage of analysis. Axial coding17,18
was applied to the data units to identify relationships
among the themes; themes were continuously revisited
and redeﬁned throughout this process. This iterative
process promoted continuous meaning making20and
allowed for the emergence of novel relationships. This
ﬁnal aspect was thought to be of great importance
given the lack of previous empirical investigations in
this area. To increase the trustworthiness of the ana-
lysis and subsequent ﬁndings, members of the
research team came together at various time points
to develop a triangular consensus.21In keeping with
qualitative conventions,22exemplar quotations from
the coaches are presented to characterise the ﬁnal
themes.
Results
Upon review of the interview transcriptions, three
major themes emerged: ( a) factors aﬀecting velocity
and metabolic contributions of the upper and lower
limbs, ( b) factors aﬀecting prescription of swim, pull
and kick training and ( c) coach knowledge develop-
ment. In line with the current literature,11each concept
is described by raw coach quotations, which are
labelled as C1 to C7 for the participant identiﬁcation
purposes and continuity of information provided.23
Factors affecting velocity and metabolic contributions
of the upper and lower limbs
Within major theme a, sub-themes emerged from the
analysis of interview data. Coaches highlightedTable 1. List of interview questions.
1 As a percentage, what extent do the actions of the upper and lower limbs contribute to swimming velocity in front crawl?
2 In terms of energy demands, what percentage of the total available energy do the muscles of the upper limbs use compared to
the lower limbs in front crawl?
3 If you had to allocate one specific role of the upper and lower limbs, what would you identify as their most important role in
front crawl swimming?
4 Please indicate the approximate percentages of your weekly training volume that are dedicated to swim, pull and kick. How
many hours (or meters) would this equate to?
5 Would you modify the training percentages allocated to swim, pull and kick based on any particular factors, and if so, what
would these factors be, and how would you change things?
6 Why do you prescribe pull sets?
7 Why do you prescribe kick sets?
8 How did you come to get your training philosophies and opinions on the roles of the upper and lower limbs?Morris et al. 3
numerous parameters that had the potential to inﬂu-
ence contributions of the upper and lower limbs to
front crawl velocity and the metabolic demands; an
in-depth analysis of the interview transcriptions
follows.
Velocity contributions. Consistent with the ﬁndings of
empirical research,24,25all coaches perceived the upper
limbs to be the primary velocity generators, with
responses indicating the upper limbs contributed
between 60 and 90% (76.4 /C613.1%; mean /C6SD) of
the velocity. Six of the interviewed coaches believed
the upper and lower limb contributions to velocity dif-
fered among individuals, while C6 believed the velocity
contribution of 90% from the upper limbs and 10%
from the lower limbs was the same for all swimmers.
Of those who thought the contributions diﬀered among
individuals (n ¼6), all coaches mentioned that the con-
tributions varied among ‘arm-dominant’ or ‘leg-domi-
nant’ swimmers, as C1 describes:
As an average, I would say it would be pretty close to
60% from the arms and 40% from the legs, but I think
it’s very diﬀerent for every swimmer; for the arm-domi-
nant swimmer, like a 2-beat kicker, it could be more
like 90% from the arms for them but with the leg-domi-
nant swimmer, or 6-beat kicker, it would be closer to
the 60%. I think it’s very, very dependent on the type of
swimmer we’re talking about. (C1)
There were mixed responses to the issue of potential
diﬀerences in the velocity contributions of the upper
and lower limbs between male and female swimmers,
with some coaches stating that males would have a
greater contribution from the upper limbs, with
others noting there were no diﬀerences: ‘Obviously
the male is physically stronger, so I think the arms
would probably play a little bit more of a role’ (C1).
‘I think it’s more individual to the athlete than it is
diﬀerent to males and females. I think across the
board, you might ﬁnd a diﬀerence but I couldn’t
guess what that diﬀerence would be, to be honest’ (C3).
Coaches also believed the velocity contribution of
the leg kick was dependent on the event distance:
As the events lengthen, from sprint to 200–400, the kick
would be far more important because, as the event
tends to go to the middle distance range, the stroke
changes slightly so swimmers will spend a little bit
more time swimming longer and slightly more towards
the catch-up position, so I’d say they would be relying
more on their legs than in sprint. (C2)
Additional factors inﬂuencing the relative contributions
of the limbs to velocity included the stroke technique,current state of physiological conditioning, ankle ﬂexi-
bility and body type. All coaches agreed that the pri-
mary role of the upper limbs was the production of
propulsion. While the speciﬁc responses varied for the
main role of the leg kick, all coaches indicated that the
leg kick plays a ‘supportive role’ with responses includ-
ing maintaining body position, providing continuity in
propulsion, promoting lift and maintaining ‘contact’ or
‘retractability’ with the water throughout the phases of
the stroke. C4 describes the integration of the dominant
and supportive roles of the upper and lower limbs,
respectively:
A good kick adds to the leverage of the stroke and the
balance of the body during the stroke. The legs are
governed by arm-to-arm timing and the legs come in
and they support that timing; they don’t dominate or
adjust the rhythm. You’ve got to release the arms to do
their job and the kick can allow and provide
stroke length by supporting balance, improving body
position and enhancing traction throughout the whole
stroke. (C4)
Energy distribution. While coaches all agreed the upper
limbs were responsible for producing the majority of
the propulsion, responses varied when discussing the
energy distribution throughout the body during front
crawl swimming. C1 did not provide a numerical
response as he believed there were too many factors
that would inﬂuence the distribution of energy to the
upper and lower body during swimming and did not
want to report a number he was not conﬁdent about.
From the other six coaches, the amount of energy used
by the upper body in swimming was 50.8 /C615.6%
(mean/C6SD response); however, responses varied
from 35 to 80%. Numerous factors were identiﬁed
that inﬂuenced the distribution of energy. Having a
well-established ability to swim the race correctly was
a commonly mentioned inﬂuencing factor:
If you’re overusing your legs throughout the ﬁrst part,
regardless of event distance, it’s going to have an ener-
getic cost, especially at the end, so you want to save the
energy used by the legs somewhat within the ﬁrst part
of the race. However you also can’t let your legs drag; if
you let your legs drag that’s going to create more resist-
ance and burn up more energy anyway. You’ve got to
know how to use them eﬃciently the whole way
through the race. (C1)
C7 was the only coach to allocate a percentage of the
total available energy to the muscles of the core, with
the percentage allocated to the core being dependent on
the type of kicking pattern used:4 International Journal of Sports Science & Coaching 0(0)
For a 2-beat kicker, energy would be probably 55% for
the arms, with 10% going to the legs for balance and
35% being used in the core. For a 6-beat kicker, I’d say
55% on the legs, 35% on the arms and 10% on the
core. (C7)
Along with the racing strategy, the racing distance was
raised as a factor that had potential to inﬂuence the
energy distribution within the body (also proposed as
an inﬂuencing factor on the velocity contributions):
It’s going to depend on what the distance of the race is.
The longer the distance, the lower the activity of the
legs, so there’s not as much energy required. I think
there’d be less percentage (than 50%) consumed by
the legs in an open water swim compared to a 1500,
800, 400, 200 and 100m race. I think it’s sort of like a
linear scale. (C6)
While all seven coaches believed the energy distribu-
tion was inﬂuenced by race-related factors, a small
number of coaches also discussed the impact of body
composition on energy distribution; however, C4 was
the only coach to identify any sex diﬀerences with
respect to the upper and lower limb contributions to
either energy consumption or velocity: ‘Typically
females would use less energy in the legs; that’s only
by virtue of the smaller muscle mass they have com-
p a r e dt om a l e s ’( C 4 ) .
When discussing the speciﬁc energy distributions to
the limbs, there were high levels of uncertainty among
the coaches, with responses including comments such
as: ‘Well, I haven’t got a clue really ...’ (C6); ‘Jeez, how
do you measure that? Hmm, we’re only guessing
really ...’ (C1); ‘It’s diﬃcult to say what the actual con-
tribution would be, very diﬃcult’ (C3).
Factors affecting the prescription of swim, pull and
kick training
When discussing the metabolic demands of the upper
and lower limb muscles, all coaches highlighted the
need for these muscles to be physiologically condi-
tioned in order to perform their roles eﬃciently and
eﬀectively. To identify how much of the weekly training
volume is required to adequately condition the upper
and lower limbs, coaches were asked to outline the pro-
portions of swim, pull and kick training that are
assigned within a typical week. The mean, standard
deviations, minimum and maximum percentages of a
typical training week dedicated by the coaches inter-
viewed to swim, pull and kick training are shown in
Table 2. Similar to the observed variations in responses
to the distribution of energy between the upper and
lower body, there was a substantial range of responsesto this question. Furthermore, multiple parameters
were identiﬁed by coaches as potential reasons for
prescribing percentages of swim, pull and kick
training that diﬀered from their ‘typical’ training
distribution.
In contrast to the other coaches, C3 allocated 0% to
pull training, as his perception was that all upper body
work was integrated into the swim work done by his
swimmers (85%); the remaining 15% of training was
allocated to kick. The remaining coaches provided mul-
tiple reasons for including pull training into the weekly
training volume, including biofeedback of the body
position in the water, stroke technique, improving the
propulsive ability of the stroke, maintaining total train-
ing volume without overusing the lower limbs, individ-
ual athlete preference and as a progression modiﬁcation
during skill sets:
My better pullers are my better freestyle swimmers. I’ve
got swimmers who are fairly poor pullers and good
kickers and they are nowhere near as successful on
the world scene. You can only kick so fast, and the
kick width can only go so wide; the propulsive phase
on the stroke has so much more potential so we have to
capitalise on that. Swimming without the legs gives you
good feedback about body posture and the feeling of
the propulsive phases of the stroke. (C2)
I usually just use pull as a progression tool. For exam-
ple, three of our sessions each week are just skill and
swim and there might be a progression there where they
(the swimmers) have to complete one of the sets as pull
but using the same stroke count as they used in the
swim. We also do negative split work with a pull
buoy. I only usually have it as a skill thing rather
than a mileage thing. If it (pull mileage) was more
than 10% of the volume, it would only be speciﬁcally
because I know one person enjoys pull more than
the other so they might get a little bit of extra pull
in the swim-down but it won’t be a designed group
thing. (C5)
While there were numerous reasons for prescribing pull
sets, kick sets are mainly included to physiologically
(both aerobically and anaerobically) condition the mus-
cles of the lower limbs:Table 2. Mean, standard deviation (SD), minimum (min), and
maximum (max) percentages of swim, pull and kick training
during a typical training week.
Mean SD Min Max
Swim 58.3 15.7 40 85
Pull 19.2 12.0 0 30
Kick 22.5 10.8 10 40Morris et al. 5
I think the main reason is, initially, they’ve got to be
well trained aerobically. There’s a lot of energy
required for them to function since they’re big muscles;
the biggest in the body. So initially they need to be
aerobically trained then anaerobically trained to ﬁt in
with the power or race-pace phase of the season. (C6)
Everyone needs to be trained to kick well because of the
amount of muscle in the legs. Speciﬁc work needs to be
done to increase the capillary density and minimise the
risk of early lactate production from a non-productive
unit. (C4)
Coaches noted that the physiological conditioning state
of the lower limb muscles had the potential to inﬂuence
the velocity contributions, metabolic contributions
and the ability of the swimmer to complete their race
using the most eﬀective pacing strategy:
You can improve the quality of the contribution the
ﬁtter the legs are. You’ve got to condition the legs
but you’ve got to make sure they don’t over-do their
job by dominating the stroke; they have to have the
ability to compliment the arms. If they (the legs) dom-
inate, they create a less-eﬃcient stroke pattern. If they
(the legs) dominate, then that’s a loss. (C4)
In comparison to the numerous factors inﬂuencing the
velocity and metabolic contributions of the upper and
lower limbs, relatively few factors were identiﬁed by
coaches as inﬂuencing their allocation of swim, pull
and kick distribution within training. Most (n ¼5) coa-
ches identiﬁed slight changes in the percentage of time
allocated to kick training depending on the phase
within the competitive season; however, the direction
of these changes was not consistent:
Early season, I probably do a little less kick but more
pull than swim. In season, I increase the amount of
kick, pull generally stays the same so in season I’m
equally sharing swim and pull. I don’t do a lot of
kick in taper and if I’m doing any kick it will really
just be shorter, sharper type things. The kicking per-
centage certainly drops in taper. (C7)
I do a bit more kick early season for conditioning pur-
poses. (C2)
Swim, pull and kick training distribution was altered
based on the distance specialisation and injury status of
the swimmer being coached:
The percentages would change if I had a 200 m swim-
mer (compared to 50 m and 100 m swimmers); the pull
would stay the same but the swim would drop back to
40% (from 50%) and the kick would increase to 30%
(from 20%). If I had an 800 m freestyler who was a2-beat kicker, I wouldn’t do that much kick at all,
just enough to get enough training volume without
riding the shoulders too hard. If they were a leg-
dominant freestyler, then you would have to condition
their kick more because their legs would be in more of a
dominant role. (C2)
If your swimmers need to have shoulder reconstruc-
tions, etc, you naturally end up doing more kick to
maintain enough ﬁtness while they’re recovering from
injury. (C2)
While the actual percentages of swim, pull and kick train-
ing don’t appear to drastically change throughout the
competitive season, coaches do report altering the type
of pull and kick training that is done during the season to
physiologically condition the upper and lower limb mus-
cles from both an aerobic and anaerobic perspective:
I tend to have more general kick and pull (training)
early on in the 15-week cycle. (Early on), I’d be more
endurance based on the kick and I’d ﬁnish on more
speed-endurance and speed work. With pull, there’d
be more powerful work as we go through. (C6)
I believe in making sure aerobically they’re good on
pull and kick and making sure anaerobically they’re
good at doing pull and kick, so we’re getting the bal-
ance and making sure all the parameters are looked
after, and looked after really well. (C1)
Using diﬀerent variations of pull training equipment,
coaches are also able to induce strength and power
adaptations as well as aerobic and anaerobic
adaptations:
We do many types of pull work; band only, pull buoy
and paddles, resistance work with sponges, etc. I do
band-only work because I think it’s good for upper–
body connection. It not just inhibits their kick but also
challenges their balance in the water so I think it helps
with improving core stabilisation when they’re swim-
ming. With the sponge, there’s a greater emphasis on
resistance and building strength so we don’t go great
distances with it. (C7)
Coach knowledge development
To determine the process through which coaches came
to understand the upper and lower limb contributions
to front crawl swimming performance, coaches were
asked what resources and/or experiences shaped their
perceptions and practices. Unanimously, coaches rated
experience as the number one factor that had inﬂuenced
their beliefs regarding the upper and lower limb
contributions:6 International Journal of Sports Science & Coaching 0(0)
It’s probably a balance between education and trial and
error. Seeing athletes use too much kick early in the
race, not preparing your athletes well enough with
kick sets and then combining that with going to con-
ferences and seeing distance programs to be shocked
that 80% of their program is kick or 40% of their pro-
gram is pull. I think it’s a combination of education
and trial and error and study. I suppose it’s also a com-
bination of remembering what I was like when I was in
that situation and comparing that to what you’ve stu-
died and observed. (C4)
I think I’ve always been under the understanding that
the upper-body, particularly in freestyle, is creating the
vast majority of the propulsion. But you forget how
you know this. I’ve been coaching for 36 years and
you don’t remember everything, it just becomes a
part of what you do. It must be learnt at some point
though, and it’s learnt through individual experience,
through education, through what you see with other
coaches, through discussions and from what you’re
observing in races. (C6)
Three coaches also noted that discussions with other
coaches had played a signiﬁcant role in forming their
understanding of the topic, along with education
through coaching conferences and reading.
Discussion
The primary aim of the present study was to examine
the thoughts and practices of expert high-performance
swimming coaches with regards to the contributions of
the upper and lower limbs to swimming performance. It
is clear from the interview dialogues that elite swim-
ming coaches strongly believe the upper limbs are the
primary velocity generators, yet it is the muscles of the
lower limbs that require extensive physiological condi-
tioning for the swimmer to perform their race plan suc-
cessfully. Indeed, previous experimental research5,6has
identiﬁed the large metabolic cost incurred by the ﬂut-
ter kick, leading some researchers to urge swimmers to
limit their use of the kick.6In contrast, the interviewed
coaches highlighted the need for swimmers to use their
kick to maintain an optimal body position and to pro-
vide continuity in propulsion; eﬀectively enhancing the
eﬃciency of the overall swimming performance.
It is clear from the coaches’ responses that a number
of factors are thought to contribute to the allocation of
energy to the limbs. Rather than a single factor, it is the
swimmers’ event distance, body composition and the
use of the ﬂutter kick (e.g. changes in kick rates and/
or intensity, or typical kicking pattern) that determine
the overall energy contribution. The latter factor and
the event distance were also associated with potential
changes in stroke technique. Indeed, researchinvestigating the metabolic cost of whole body front
crawl has identiﬁed the potential for body compos-
ition,26,27stoke kinematics28,29and inter-limb coordin-
ation patterns30to inﬂuence the overall metabolic cost,
resulting in the possibility that these parameters may
also play a role in determining the relative energetic
demands of the upper and lower limbs in front crawl.
In view of the present ﬁndings, future eﬀorts by sport
scientists to quantify the velocity and metabolic contri-
butions of the limbs in swimming should consider
including, at both the individual and group level, meas-
ures of kick rate, stroke-kick coordination patterns,
biomechanical analysis of the stroke technique and par-
ticipant characteristics (i.e. event distance and body
composition). In keeping with the recommendations
of previous research on the role of sport science and
sport scientists in informing coaching work,31,32consid-
eration of the above factors in future applied research
will assist swimming coaches interpret and apply
experimental research. While coaches did not identify
potential diﬀerences between males and females, min-
imal experimental research has investigated potential
diﬀerences in the limb contributions between the
sexes.33The results from the present study and an
understanding of the gaps in the current quantitative
research could be translated into experimental research
aiming to identify how much of the variation in velocity
and metabolic cost contributions of the limbs is attrib-
utable to diﬀerences between the sexes.
Interviewed coaches highlighted that the percentages
of swim, pull and kick training were mainly altered
based on the time of season, the distance specialisation
of swimmer and/or limitations due to injury.
Interestingly, no coach used a systematic testing
approach to identify and/or monitor the needs of the
individual athletes. As outlined by Savage and Pyne,34
physiological testing can be utilised at particular time
points during a training season to assess the aerobic
and anaerobic capacities and/or power of a swimmer,
which can identify potential areas for improvement.
Testing allows for an evidence-based individualised
approach to training prescription and can be used to
assess the eﬃcacy of particular training interventions.
Furthermore, testing provides a valuable tool for the
detection of potentially talented athletes and, once iden-
tiﬁed, allows for the prediction of performance based on
test results.35,36Currently, there is no published desig-
nated testing protocol to assess the metabolic and vel-
ocity contributions of the limbs in swimming, nor is
there benchmark data regarding the limb contributions
and how these contributions diﬀer among diﬀerent
groups of swimmers. A range of protocols have been
used within the swimming literature, including two
recent studies37,38that have utilised 200 m pull and
kick time trials to assess the eﬃcacy of speciﬁc pullMorris et al. 7
and kick training interventions, respectively, along with
performing _VO 2peak and power output testing on spe-
ciﬁc swimming ergometry. Additionally, Ribeiro et al.39
have used maximal 100 m eﬀorts in swim and pull to
investigate diﬀerences in _VO 2kinetics. While assessment
tools such as the aforementioned methods exist within
the literature, testing is currently not being utilised to
determine the metabolic proﬁles of the upper and
lower limbs in the applied high-performance setting.
Thus, it is not surprising to learn that even expert
high-performance coaches are required to prescribe
pull and kick training based primarily on their own per-
sonal coaching experience. Not only would the develop-
ment of a testing protocol to identify the optimal upper
and lower limb contributions assist coaches with the
monitoring and assessment of physiological adaptations
to training, it may also prove to be a valuable tool in the
talent identiﬁcation process of the next generation of
elite front crawl swimmers.
In the coaches’ quest to be informed on the factors
contributing to peak performance, resources such as
journal articles, conference presentations, textbooks
and even social media can provide valuable information
to ensure their practices are evidence based. However,
in keeping with previous research,40,41and as high-
lighted by the interviewed coaches in the present
study, previous coaching experience is often heavily
relied upon, when it comes to the designation of pull
and kick sets, within the training plan. The vast major-
ity of coaches rely on past experience or the experience
of others; practices that may not necessarily be based
on scientiﬁc evidence. While there is often a push for
evidence-based practice, it should be noted that scien-
tiﬁc articles and textbooks do not necessarily have the
answers to every practical challenge a coach may
experience in the daily training environment. As such,
it may not be preferred, but often necessary for high-
performance coaches to use their experiential know-
ledge to guide the components of prescription of
swim, pull and kick training. While experimental
research is yet to determine the optimal allocation of
swim, pull and kick training (assuming such a thing
exists), it is evident that there is substantial variation
in the allocation of pull and kick training among coa-
ches, even at the highest level. Future research that
addresses the practical challenges coaches face is
required to determine the optimal ratio of swim, pull
and kick training, considering the distance specialisa-
tion of the swimmers being coached, the time of the
season and the injury status of the athletes.
Developing evidence-based guidelines with respect to
the prescription of swim, pull and kick within a training
season may reduce the reported variation among coa-
ches of all levels of experience. Since the interviewed
coaches highlighted their willingness to learn fromothers, an opportunity for sports scientists to comple-
ment the existing practices of expert coaches through
integration of coach knowledge and scientiﬁc concepts
is encouraged.
While the present investigation has provided novel
insight into the perceptions and practices of expert
high-performance swimming coaches with respect to
upper and lower limb contributions and training prac-
tices, it must be noted that the participant group com-
prised of only Australian male swim coaches. Although
purposeful sampling was implemented to gain insight
into the perceptions of expert high-performance coa-
ches, a potential bias may have arisen from having
included only this type of coach due to the desire to
maintain a competitive advantage. Furthermore, within
the relatively small sample size (n ¼7), variation in the
distance specialisation of the coaches potentially con-
tributed to the observed variation in reported training
allocation. Similarly, it is possible that cultural diﬀer-
ences among high-performance coaches from various
countries may have inﬂuenced the results. For example,
coaches from diﬀerent cultures may not have the same
opportunities to share knowledge and experiences with
one another, or, on the other hand, may be privy to
regular education seminars and training camps dedi-
cated to pull and/or kick performance. A ﬁnal limita-
tion must be noted with respect to the coaches’
knowledge acquisition; it is possible yet diﬃcult to con-
ﬁrm that coaches do in fact implement an evidence-
based practice (as opposed to reporting a reliance on
anecdotal evidence), despite not recalling the origin of
their knowledge. Indeed, the reported percentages of
pull and kick training volume are not measured and
are instead based on coach recall. As such, the actual
amount of pull and kick training completed by elite
swimmers may vary from the reported values; further
research in this area is warranted. Additionally, future
research including both male and female coaches from
various countries and ranging from the development
coaching level to the elite coaching level could provide
additional insight into the decision-making processes
for training prescription among swimming coaches.
Conclusion
This study identiﬁed consistent beliefs among high-
performance swimming coaches with regards to the vel-
ocity contributions of the upper and lower limbs in
front crawl that are congruent with the observations
of existing experimental research.24,42However, large
variability was observed in the reported metabolic con-
tributions of the limbs. The allocation of swim, pull and
kick training also varied among coaches, with coaches
highlighting numerous parameters (i.e. the distance spe-
cialisation of the swimmers, injury status, stroke8 International Journal of Sports Science & Coaching 0(0)
technique and physiological conditioning status of the
upper and lower limb muscles) that inﬂuence their deci-
sion-making process when planning training programs
for their athletes. Such ﬁndings make a unique and
valuable contribution to the existing literature and
enable sport scientists and developmental coaches to
understand how and why high-performance coaches
prescribe swim, pull and kick training. Sport scientists
are encouraged to be cognizant of the complex inter-
play among parameters that coaches believe inﬂuence
training allocation to make informed decisions when
planning training intervention studies, designing testing
protocols, interpreting testing results and/or educating
developmental coaches on the metabolic conditioning
requirements of the upper and lower limbs in front
crawl performance.
Acknowledgements
The investigators would like to thank the coaches for their
participation. Jeﬀrey Greenhill (Queensland Academy of
Sport; Sport Performance Innovation and Knowledge
Excellence) is thanked for his assistance with reﬁning the
interview structure and reviewing the coding process.
Declaration of conflicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential conﬂicts of interest with
respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article.
Funding
The author(s) received no ﬁnancial support for the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.
ORCID iD
Kirstin S Morris https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6040-9647
References
1. Lyle J. Sports coaching concepts: a framework for coaches’
behaviour . London: Routledge, 2002.
2. Rynne SB and Mallett CJ. Understanding the work and
learning of high performance coaches. Phys Educ Sport
Pedagog 2012; 17: 507–523.
3. Haag H. Development and structure of a theoretical
framework for sport science (‘‘Sportwissenschaft’’). Quest
1979; 31: 25–35.
4. Hughes MD and Bartlett RM. The use of performance
indicators in performance analysis. J Sport Sci 2002; 20:
739–754.
5. Ogita F, Onodera T, Tamaki H, et al. Metabolic profile
during exhaustive arm stroke, leg kick, and whole body
swimming lasting 15 s to 10 min. In: Chatard JC (ed.)
Biomechanics and medicine in swimming IX . Saint-
Etienne, France: University of Saint-Etienne, 2003,
pp.361–366.6. Zamparo P, Pendergast DR, Mollendorf J, et al. An
energy balance of front crawl. Eur J Appl Physiol 2005;
94: 134–144.
7. Berg B and Lune H. Qualitative research methods for the
social sciences , 8th ed. Boston: Pearson, 2012.
8. Masue O, Swai I and Anasel M. The qualitative-quanti-
tative ‘disparities’ in social science research: what does
qualitative comparative analysis (QCA) bring in to
bridge the gap? Asian Soc Sci 2013; 9: 211–221.
9. Hodge K, Henry G and Smith W. A case study of excel-
lence in elite sport: motivational climate in a world cham-
pion team. Sport Psychol 2014; 21: 60–74.
10. Williams SJ and Kendall L. Perceptions of elite coaches
and sport scientists of the research needs for elite coach-
ing practice. J Sport Sci 2007; 25: 1577–1586.
11. Greenwood D, Davids K and Renshaw I. Experiential
knowledge of expert coaches can help identify informa-
tional constraints on performance of dynamic intercep-
tive actions. J Sports Sci 2014; 32: 328–335.
12. Nash C and Collins D. Tacit knowledge in expert coach-
ing: science or art? Quest 2006; 58: 465–477.
13. Williams AM and Ericsson KA. Perceptual-cognitive
expertise in sport: some considerations when applying
the expert performance approach. Hum Mov Sci 2005;
24: 283–307.
14. Patton MQ. Qualitative research and evaluation methods .
3rd ed. London: Sage, 2002.
15. Charmaz K. Constructing grounded theory . London:
Sage, 2006.
16. Sturges JE and Hanrahan KJ. Comparing telephone and
face-to-face qualitative interviewing: a research note.
Qual Res 2004; 4: 107–118.
17. Gratton C and Jones I. Research methods for sport stu-
dies. London: Routledge, 2004.
18. Strauss A and Corbin J. Basics of qualitative research:
techniques and procedures for developing grounded
theory . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1998.
19. Co ˆ te ´J, Salmela J and Russell SJ. The knowledge of high-
performance gymnastics coaches: methodological frame-
work. Sport Psychol 1995; 9: 65–75.
20. Srivastava P and Hopwood N. A practical iterative
framework for qualitative data analysis. Int J Qual
Meth 2009; 8: 76–84.
21. Lincoln YS and Guba EG. Naturalistic inquiry . Newbury
Park, CA: Sage, 1985.
22. Sparkes AC and Smith B. Qualitative research methods in
sport, exercise and health: from process to product . New
York, NY: Routledge, 2014.
23. Cormier ML, Bloom GA and Harvey WJ. Elite coach
perceptions of cohesion on coacting teams. Int J Sports
Sci Coach 2015; 10: 1039–1053.
24. Deschodt VJ, Arsac LM and Rouard AH. Relative con-
tribution of arms and legs in humans to propulsion in
25m sprint front crawl swimming. Eur J Appl Physiol
1999; 80: 192–199.
25. Morris KS, Osborne MA, Shephard ME, et al. Velocity,
aerobic power and metabolic cost of whole body and
arms only front crawl swimming at various stroke rates.
Eur J Appl Physiol 2016; 116: 1075–1085.Morris et al. 9
26. di Prampero PE. The energy cost of human locomotion
on land and in water. Int J Sports Med 1986; 7: 55–72.
27. Zamparo P, Capelli C, Termin B, et al. Effect of the
underwater torque on the energy cost, drag and efficiency
of front crawl swimming. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup
Physiol 1996; 73: 195–201.
28. Barbosa TM, Bragada JA, Reis VM, et al. Energetics and
biomechanics as determining factors of swimming per-
formance: updating the state of the art. J Sci Med
Sport 2010; 13: 262–269.
29. Barbosa TM, Fernandes RJ, Keskinen KL, et al. The
influence of stroke mechanics into energy cost of elite
swimmers. Eur J Appl Physiol 2008; 103: 139–149.
30. Seifert L, Komar J, Crettenand F, et al. Inter-limb coord-
ination and energy cost in swimming. J Sci Med Sport
2014; 17: 439–444.
31. Burkett BJ and Mellifont RB. Sport science and coaching
in paralympic swimming. Int J Sports Sci Coach 2008; 3:
105–112.
32. Reade I, Rogers W and Hall N. Knowledge transfer: how
do high performance coaches access the knowledge of
sport scientists? Int J Sports Sci Coach 2008; 3: 319–334.
33. Rodriguez FA, La ¨tt E, Ju ¨rima¨e J, et al. _VO 2kinetics in
all-out arm stroke, leg kick and whole stroke front crawl
in 100-m swimming. Int J Sports Med 2016; 37: 191–196.
34. Savage B and Pyne DB. Physiological protocols for the
assessment of athletes in specific sports; Swimming.
In: Tanner RK and Gore CJ (eds) Physiological tests
for elite athletes . Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics Inc.,
2013, pp.435–448.35. Re `gnier G, Salmela JH and Russell SJ. Talent detection
and development in sport . New York: Macmillan, 1993.
36. Williams AM and Reilly T. Talent identification and
development in soccer. J Sport Sci 2000; 18: 657–667.
37. Konstantaki M and Winter EM. The effectiveness of a
leg-kicking swimming training program on swimming
performance, leg movement economy and leg aerobic
power in competitive swimmers. Int J Sports Sci Coach
2007; 2: 37–47.
38. Konstantaki M, Winter EM and Swaine IL. Effects of
arms-only swimming training on performance, movement
economy, and aerobic power. Int J Sports Physiol
Perform 2008; 3: 294–304.
39. Ribeiro J, Figueiredo P, Sousa A, et al. VO 2kinetics and
metabolic contributions during full and upper body
extreme swimming intensity. Eur J Appl Physiol 2015;
115: 1117–1124.
40. Erickson K, Bruner MW, MacDonald DJ, et al. Gaining
insight into actual and preferred source of coaching
knowledge. Int J Sports Sci Coach 2008; 3: 527–538.
41. Mallett CJ, Rynne SB and Billett S. Valued learning and
experiences of early career and experienced high-perfor-
mance coaches. Phys Educ Sport Pedagog 2016; 21:
89–104.
42. Hollander AP, De Groot G, van Ingen Schenau GJ, et al.
Contribution of the legs to propulsion in front crawl
swimming. In: Ungerechts B, Wilke K and Reischle K
(eds) Swimming science V . Champaign, IL: Human
Kinetics Inc., 1986, pp.39–43.10 International Journal of Sports Science & Coaching 0(0)
