CLINICAL COMMENTARY 
Clinical Implications of Secondary 
Impingement of the Shoulder in 
Freestyle Swimmers 
Marnie Allegrucci, MS, PT, ATC' 
Susan I. Whitney, PhD, PT, ATC2 
lames 1. Irrgang, MS, PT, ATC3 
wimming is an activity that 
continues to gain popular- 
ity in the United States as a 
source of cardiovascular 
exercise as well as a highly 
competitive sport (1 3.3 1,53). Johnson 
et al report that 165,000 competitive 
swimmers are registered with the 
United States Swimming Council 
(3 1). The most commonly reported 
musculoskeletal problems related to 
swimming are shoulder injuries, 
most often nondiscriminately re- 
ferred to as "swimmer's shoulder" 
(1 3.3 1.52.53). As the popularity of 
swimming continues to grow, so does 
the incidence of swimmer's shoulder 
(1 3,29). 
The nondescript diagnosis of 
"swimmer's shoulder" can be related 
to pathology of the acromioclavicu- 
lar joint, rotator cuff, long head of 
the biceps, labrum, or any form of 
shoulder instability (3 137). Swim- 
mer's shoulder is not an accurate 
clinical diagnosis, but it discloses the 
fact that swimmers place high de- 
mands on their shoulders. Swim- 
mers, along with other overhand 
athletes, have been identified as hav- 
ing increased shoulder laxity as a 
consequence of the physical demands 
placed on the shoulder during ath- 
letic activity (2,29,37,63). Although 
swimming is physically demanding, 
the mechanism of injury in swim- Swimming has become a popular recreational activity as well as a highly competitive sport in 
the United States. The repetitive nature of swimming can predispose the shoulder to mechanical 
impingement and microtrauma, which may lead to laxity, rotator cuff fatigue, and subsequent 
secondary impingement. Improper stroke mechanics can place the swimmer's shoulder at further 
risk. The purpose of this paper is to describe the pathology of secondary impingement in freestyle 
swimmers and to discuss the clinical implications for rehabilitation of swimmers with the pathology. 
A thorough subjective and objective evaluation is necessary to design a successful rehabilitation 
program. The rehabilitation program for swimmers with secondary impingement includes modifica- 
tion of training, flexibility, range of motion, strengthening, and mobilization as indicated. Functional 
and proprioceptive training may also be useful techniques in the rehabilitation of swimmer's 
shoulder. lmproper stroke mechanics can also have clinical implications on swimmer's shoulders 
with secondary impingement. The clinical implication of secondary impingement in freestyle swim- 
mers suggests that the primary goal of rehabilitation is to promote equilibrium of the shoulder 
complex while accounting for the demands of the sport. 
Key Words: swimming, shoulder impingement and instability, rehabilitation 
' Community Education Coordinator, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Center lor Sports Medicine; 
Graduate student, Department of Physical Therapy, Pennsylvania Hall, University olpittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 
1526 1 
'Assistant Professor, Department of Physical Therapy, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 
'Assistant Professor, Department of Physical Therapy, University of Pittsburgh; Director, Outpatient Physical 
Therapy and Sports Medicine, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Center for Sports Medicine and Rehabil- 
itation, Pittsburgh, PA 
ming is usually not traumatic but 
more cumulative in nature. Muscular 
fatigue of the rotator cuff and scap 
ula stabilizers may develop after pro- 
longed use, leading to increased an- 
terior and superior humeral head 
translation and eventually to second- 
ary impingement and resultant rota- 
tor cuff tears (1 7,22,25,28,29,63). 
The purpose of this paper is to de- 
scribe the pathology of secondary 
shoulder impingement in freestyle 
swimmers and to discuss clinical ini- plications for rehabilitation of these 
individuals. 
EPIDEMIOLOGY OF SWIMMING 
INJURIES 
Several studies report a high in- 
cidence of shoulder pain among 
swimmers (2.13,14,20,2 13 l), with 
the incidence of pain ranging be- 
tween 40 and 69% (2.1 3,20,2 1,3 1). 
A recent study of a Division I colle- 
giate swimming team reported that 
JOSPT Volume 20 Number 6 December 1994 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on August 12, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 1994 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.

CLINICAL COMMENTARY 
69% of the swimmers surveyed had 
pain at present competition levels, 
and as high as 87% of the individuals 
reported shoulder pain at some time 
throughout their career (48). Rich- 
ardson et al reported a 52-57% inci- 
dence of shoulder pain in elite swim- 
mers (53). This same study reported 
a higher incidence of pain in males 
and in sprinters and middle distance 
swimmers. Additionally, there is a 
higher incidence of shoulder pain on 
the breath side (52). Richardson et al 
(53) reported that shoulder pain was 
elicited 75% of the time during pull- 
through, whereas Ciullo and 
Stevens reported a 50% incidence of 
pain during mid pull-through (1 3). 
Swimmers spend up to 80% of their 
time swimming freestyle, no matter 
what stroke is used competitively (9). 
The use of hand paddles has 
been found to be a predisposing fac- 
tor in shoulder pain, although hand 
paddles are not the only factor that 
causes shoulder pain (2 1,53). Many 
other factors should be considered, 
such as the repetitive trauma in- 
volved in the nature of the sport, 
muscle inflexibility, joint laxity, 
weakness, muscular imbalances, and 
improper swimming biomechanics 
(2,3,5,8,13,15,16,20). 
Overuse may be the etiology 
leading to instability and subsequent 
impingement. During the biome- 
chanics of a baseball pitch, particu- 
larly with deceleration, the posterior 
rotator cuff needs to contract eccen- 
trically to control internal rotation at 
peak average angular velocities of 
approximately 6,000°/sec (47). The 
speed of the shoulder during free- 
style swimming has not been docu- 
mented, but it does not appear to 
have the same violent velocityde- 
pendent eccentric contraction of the 
cuff muscles as throwing. Neverthe- 
less, overuse of the rotator cuff may 
cause instability and subsequent im- 
pingement when the duration and 
repetition of freestyle swimming are 
considered. Swimmers average 
8,000-20,000 m a day and may 
practice up to twice a day, 5-7 days a week (2,20,52). The number of 
revolutions of each shoulder tends to 
be greater in swimming than any 
other sport (52). If the average 
swimmer swims 10,000 m daily, esti- 
mating 10 cycles for every 25 m, 
there would be 4,000 repetitions per 
shoulder on a daily basis (49). In 
swimming, minimal recovery time is 
available for the muscle to recover 
from one stroke to the next, and 
most swimmers, particularly long dis- 
tance swimmers, swim for several 
minutes or longer without rest. 
Pitchers are subjected to consider- 
ably higher forces and velocity lev- 
:Is, but they have a rest or some re- 
covery time between pitches. Thus, 
If the average 
swimmer swims 
70,000 m daily, 
estimating 70 cycles 
for every 25 m, there 
would be 4,000 
repetitions per 
shoulder on a 
daily basis. 
swimming appears to be a more en- 
durance-based sport. It is important 
for the clinician dealing with swim- 
mers to be knowledgeable of proper 
swimming biomechanics and prob- 
lems associated with poor technique. 
ANATOMY AND BIOMECHANICS 
The shoulder joint has often 
been described as a joint that sacri- 
fices stability for the sake of mobil- 
ity. It is a multiaxial spheroidal joint 
between the humeral head and the 
glenoid fossa (65). The boney struc- 
tures offer little stability because the 
radius of curvature of the humerus 
exceeds that of the glenoid fossa. 
Glenohumeral contact surfaces vary with the relative size of the humeral 
head to the size and curvature of the 
radius (55,56). 
The glenoid labrum functions to 
add depth to the glenohumeral artic- 
ulation (26,56). The labrum has ad- 
ditional connections with the long 
head of the biceps superiorly and the 
inferior and middle glenohumeral 
ligaments (1 I). Glenoid labral tears 
have been attributed to excessive 
mobility in the swimming shoulder 
(37)- 
The other static restraints to mo- 
tion of the glenohumeral joint are 
the glenohumeral ligaments and the 
joint capsule. The superior, middle, 
and inferior glenohumeral ligaments 
(SGHL, MGHL, and IGHL, respec- 
tively) are thickenings of the capsule 
that provide stability to the glenohu- 
meral joint at different points of the 
range of motion (33,44,60). Ante- 
rior and inferior translation at 90" 
of abduction is stabilized by the 
IGHL (62). Rowe and Zarins report 
that the anterior/superior capsule, 
or the distance between the supraspi- 
natus and subscapularis insertions, is 
an important consideration in pro- 
viding anterior stability (54). 
The insertions of the four rota- 
tor cuff tendons into the joint cap 
sule and humeral head provide dy- 
namic as well as static support to the 
glenohumeral joint (6). Saha reports 
from EMG studies that the rotator 
cuff muscles "compress" as well as 
"steer" the humeral head in relation 
to the glenoid (55). 
PATHOMECHANICS 
Shoulder impingement and in- 
stability are two of the most common 
dysfunctions discussed in overhand 
athletes. Shoulder impingement can 
be subdivided into primary and 
secondary impingement. Primary im- 
pingement is a mechanical obstruc- 
tion of the rotator cuff tendons un- 
der the anterior inferior one-third of 
the acromion, the coracoacromial 
ligament, and sometimes the acro- 
mioclavicular joint (42). Secondary 
Volume 20 Number 6 December 1994 JOSPT 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on August 12, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 1994 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.

CLINICAL COMMENTARY 
impingement is defined as a "rela- 
tive" decrease in subacromial space 
as a result of glenohumeral instabil- 
ity (I 7). Glenohumeral instability can 
develop from disruption of static sta- 
bilizers (ligament, labrum, and cap 
sule) or fatigue or weakness of the 
dynamic stabilizers (1 7,25). Thus, 
secondary impingement can be 
caused by rotator cuff dysfunction 
(fatigue or injury) as well as instabil- 
ity due to lax static restraints. Fac- 
tors such as acromial morphology, 
decreased subacromial space, intra- 
tendinous tears, and inadequate vas- 
cular supply to the rotator cuff ten- 
dons may be predisposing factors for 
both primary and secondary im- 
pingement syndromes (7,39,5 1). 
Typically, patients with primary 
impingement present with limited 
motion, whereas in secondary im- 
pingement, shoulders tend to have 
excessive amounts of motion, with 
instability being the primary prob- 
lem (29,42,63). Warner et al re- 
ported a difference in the pattern of 
limitations when examining two pa- 
tient groups with impingement and 
instability (63). They found that pa- 
tients diagnosed with impingement 
had limitations in internal rotation 
and horizontal adduction when com- 
pared to patients diagnosed with in- 
stability (63). However, 68% of the 
instability group concurrently exhib- 
ited positive impingement signs, in 
addition to a positive apprehension 
test and increased glenohumeral 
translation (63). 
Several studies have demon- 
strated that swimmer's shoulders ex- 
hibit the same shifts in range of mo- 
tion and strength that has been 
found in throwing athletes (2,15). 
Beach et al demonstrated that colle- 
giate swimmers had a greater range 
of glenohumeral external rotation at 
the expense of internal rotation (2). 
Both Beach et al and McMasters et 
a1 found similar shifts of internal/ex- 
ternal rotation strength ratios on 
swimmers (2,38). 
Jobe and Kvitne have proposed a 
classification system for overhead athletes which takes into account the 
overlap between impingement and 
instability (29). Most authors agree 
that the overlap of impingement and 
instability is difficult to diagnose be- 
cause the instability may be subtle, 
and there may not be a history of 
traumatic injury (8,29,54,63). Thus, 
the condition was coined "silent sub- 
luxation." The silent atraumatic 
transient subluxation is the most dif- 
ficult to diagnose (29,36,63,64). 
Warner et al reported that 68% of 
shoulders that had been identified 
with positive impingement signs had 
concurrent anterior laxity which was 
masked by silent subluxation (63). 
Warren suggests that patients 
will often complain of pain opposite 
to the side of the subluxation (64). 
For example, a patient subluxing an- 
teriorly would have complaints pos- 
Swimmers had a 
greater range of 
glenohumeral external 
rotation at the 
expnse of 
internal rotation. 
teriorly. However, when secondary 
impingement occurs, the individual 
will have pain on both sides of the 
joint. Warren also suggests identify- 
ing the motion that creates the pain 
and the structures that it stresses. 
The motion of adduction and inter- 
nal rotation during pull-through 
stresses the posterior structures (64). 
Likewise, abduction and external ro- 
tation during the recovery phase of 
freestyle swimming may stress the 
anterior structures. 
The repetitive stresses incurred 
to the capsule during swimming may 
lead to laxity and possible instability 
and dysfunction. Microtrauma devel- 
ops from prolonged time and yar- 
dage spent swimming. Fatigue of the 
rotator cuff may cause the humeral head to translate superiorly, which 
further stresses the static and dy- 
namic stabilizers (29). Recent dy- 
namic shoulder studies performed 
on cadaver shoulders support the 
theory that the posterior rotator cuff 
muscles provide dynamic stabiliza- 
tion of the humerus from gliding su- 
periorly or anteriorly and are effec- 
tive in reducing the amount of strain 
on the anterior ligamentous struc- 
tures (5,23). The pathology of the 
unstable shoulder is cyclic in nature 
in that instability can damage the 
rotator cuff via impingement or 
overuse, and the dysfunction of the 
rotator cuff will cause a greater de- 
gree of functional instability. It is im- 
portant for the clinician dealing with 
swimmers to be knowledgeable of 
proper swimming biomechanics 
and problems associated with poor 
technique. 
BIOMECHANICS OF SWIMMING 
Swimming is a sport in which 
speed is equated with forward pro- 
pulsion of the body over the arm in 
the water (3 1,35,52). The portion of 
time that the hand is maintained in 
the water is referred to as pull- 
through, and the time during which 
the arm is above the water is called 
the recovery period (Figure 1) 
(49.52). Pull-through is the most 
complex and techniquedependent of 
the two phases. Pull-through can be 
further subdivided into early, mid, 
and late pull-through (3 1,49,53). 
During the pull-through phase, the 
arm traverses an S-shaped pattern 
(Figure 2). 
Pull-Through 
Initially on water contact, the 
shoulder is internally rotated, with 
the elbow slightly flexed and pointed 
upward with the palm facing out. 
The hand enters the water medial to 
the shoulder joint, and no pulling 
occurs during entry. The shoulder is 
abducted and internally rotated; 
thus, the upper trapezius, rhom- 
JOSPT Volume 20 Number 6 December 1994 309 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on August 12, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 1994 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.

CLINICAL COMMENTARY 
FICURE 1. The stroke phases for freestyle swimming. (Adapted from Pink et a1 (49), with permission). 
FICURE 2. The stroke mechanics of pull-through in freestyle swimming; a = early pull-through, b = mid pull- 
through, c = late pull-through. (Adapted from Pink et a1 (49), with permission). 
boids, supraspinatus, and the ante- 
rior and middle deltoids are active to 
abduct the shoulder and upwardly 
rotate the scapula (49). The serratus 
anterior also has peak activity during 
hand entry as an upward rotation of 
the scapula occurs (49). The serratus 
anterior and subscapularis are active 
throughout the entire stroke in nor- 
mal shoulders (49). 
After hand entry, the hand 
moves down and out from the body 
with the elbow slightly flexed (35). 
The shoulder appears to extend and 
horizontally abduct in the initiation 
of the S-shaped curve. When the 
hand reaches the deepest point in 
the water, mid pull-through begins, 
which can be somewhat variable 
among swimmers (35.49). The 
shoulder internally rotates with el- 
bow flexion, and in some instances, 
the arm may cross the midline of the 
body. The shoulder will move from 
internal rotation and horizontal ad- duction to 90" of abduction and full 
internal rotation by the end of mid 
pull-through (1 2,43). During mid 
pull-through, high electromyo- 
graphic (EMG) activity has been re- 
ported in the pectoralis major, teres 
minor, subscapularis, and the serra- 
tus anterior during shoulder internal 
rotation and extension, ie., pulling 
the body over the arm (49). A dry 
land study has also noted significant 
activity in the biceps during mid 
pull-through, but this has not been 
consistently documented in water 
studies (43). 
Late pull-through begins when 
the arm is perpendicular to the body 
and ends at hand exit with the palm 
facing the thigh (35). The latissimus 
dorsi begins to fire after the arm be- 
comes perpendicular to the body. 
Posterior deltoid activity is followed 
by activity of the middle and ante- 
rior deltoid, respectively, and the 
hand proceeds to exit (49). Recovery 
The recovery phase is also subdi- 
vided into early and late periods. As 
the hand exits the water, the hand 
internally rotates to minimize drag 
(35). The shoulder is internally ro- 
tating, extending, and abducting 
while the scapula is retracting. Thus, 
the middle deltoid, supraspinatus, 
subscapularis, and infraspinatus (to 
depress the humerus) are active (49). 
During late recovery, the shoulder is 
abducting and internally rotating in 
order to position the hand for entry 
into the water. The infraspinatus is 
the primary mover from midrecov- 
ery to hand entry, working to con- 
trol internal rotation of the shoulder 
(49). 
Biomechanics of Swimmers With 
Symptomatic Shoulders 
During early pull-through, hand 
placement of swimmers with painful 
shoulders was found to be further 
from the midline and in a !ess ab- 
ducted position (57). A decrease in 
EMG activity of the upper trapezius. 
rhomboids, and anterior and middle 
deltoids was found to be consistent 
with decreased shoulder abduction 
and concomitant upward scapular 
rotation. The serratus anterior ex- 
hibited a significant decrease in ac- 
tivity throughout the entire stroke 
cycle in swimmers with painful 
shoulders (57). Swimmers with pain- 
ful shoulders also tended to drop 
their elbow in late recovery and 
early pull-through, which is univer- 
sally recognized by coaches as a sign 
of fatigue (35.48.57). 
The highest incidence of pain 
was reported during mid pull- 
through (1 3,52). Swimmers who 
cross the hand past the midline of 
the body may have a greater chance 
of impingement (48). Horizontal ad- 
duction and internal rotation is a po- 
sition similar to the Hawkin's test 
used in diagnosis of impingement 
syndrome (1 5,24,42,43). 
Volume 20 Number 6 December 1994 JOSPT 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on August 12, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 1994 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.

CLINICAL COMMENTARY 
The infraspinatus tended to fire 
earlier in late pull-through in swim- 
mers with painful shoulders, com- 
pared to initial firing in early recov- 
ery in normal shoulders (57). This 
difference has been ascribed to the 
fact that swimmers with painful 
shoulders tended to have earlier 
hand exit from the water (57). It has 
also been suggested that the early 
hand exit is the swimmer's effort to 
decrease the time in adduction, 
where vascular insufficiency or 
"wringing out" of the supraspinatus 
tendon can occur (5 1.57). 
The only significant change in 
the recovery phase was decreased an- 
terior deltoid and subscapularis ac- 
tivity in swimmers with painful 
shoulders (57). ~nteresti-ngly, Glous- 
man et al reported decreased EMG 
activity of the subscapularis, latissi- 
mus dorsi, and pectoralis major in 
pitchers with shoulder instability 
(1 9). They suggested that firing pat- 
terns may have been altered to mini- 
mize anterior pull on the head of the 
humerus and prevent subsequent 
subluxation (1 9). A forceful contrac- 
tion of the pectoralis major and latis- 
simus dorsi may cause secondary 
impingement of the shoulder with 
anterior instability during the pull- 
through phase of swimming. How- 
ever, the variation of EMG firing 
patterns found in swimmers with 
painful shoulders cannot be attrib- 
uted to laxity because it was not 
assessed in this study. 
Changes in EMG patterns in 
painful shoulders may be due to 
muscular weakness. However, these 
data need to be reviewed cautiously 
because the presence of pain alone 
may alter the swimming stroke. 
Thus, EMG firing patterns may be 
varied due to pain or to a change in 
the stroke pattern and should not be 
attributed to weakness alone. 
In summary, during mid pull- 
through, there is risk of mechanical 
impingement due to the positioning 
of the joint in adduction and internal 
rotation (25). During late pull- 
through, the shoulder is adducted, possibly "wringing out" the supraspi- 
natus tendon (5 1). During recovery, 
the shoulder may be at risk for pri- 
mary impingement due to the posi- 
tioning or secondary impingement 
due to anterior laxity and rotator 
cuff fatigue. 
EVALUATION OF THE SWIMMER 
Evaluation of the shoulder with 
instability and/or impingement in 
freestyle swimmers needs to include 
a subjective history, postural exami- 
nation, examination of range of mo- 
tion (ROM), strength, special tests 
for impingement and instability, and, 
finally, assessment of swimming 
biomechanics. 
During hand entry, 
the shoulder should 
be in infernal rofafion 
wifh the palm 
facing outm 
History 
A thorough subjective history is 
important for discovering the precip 
itating factors leading to shoulder 
dysfunction. The athlete should be 
questioned as to when pain is felt 
during the stroke cycle. It is impor- 
tant to subjectively identify when the 
stroke mechanics become altered or 
ineffective secondary to fatigue, 
which will help in determining how 
perceptive the individual is to his/ 
her body (48). 
Subjective assessment of pain 
should include the location, inten- 
sity, and exacerbating factors. 
Greipp modified a pain classification 
system specifically for swimmers 
(20). The system includes a rating 
scale from 0-6: 0 is unsymptomatic, 
1 is occasional pain, 2 is pain after 
practice, 3 is pain with almost every 
revolution of the arm, 4 is pain 8 hours a day that may affect practice, 
5 is pain that definitely affects prac- 
tice, and 6 is pain almost constantly, 
making it impossible to practice (20). 
This information can be useful in de- 
termining if an individual should be 
allowed to continue swimming. 
Visual Inspection 
Inspection of the swimmer's 
shoulder should include postural 
alignment, muscle quality, and palpa- 
tion for trigger points (60). A typical 
posture of a swimmer includes for- 
ward rounded shoulders and pro- 
tracted scapulas. This static postural 
alignment may give rise to muscle 
imbalances with adaptive shortening \, 
of the anterior chest musculature 
and stretch-weakness of the posterior 
scapulothoracic musculature, such as 
the trapezius (32). Maintaining for- 
ward rounded shoulders and a pro- 
tracted scapula could theoretically 
change the orientation of the gle- 
noid fossa and perhaps be a predis- 
posing factor to the development of 
instability and impingement. 
Scapulothoracic Rhythm 
Disruption of normal scapulo- 
thoracic rhythm will predispose the 
shoulder to impingement and insta- 
bility (46). The scapulo-humeral re- 
gion is a finely tuned combination of 
mobility and stability. The scapula 
has to be able to rotate and then sta- 
bilize for effective rotator cuff func- 
tion. During the recovery phase of 
swimming, the scapula should up 
wardly rotate and then be stabilized 
by the scapulothoracic muscles in or- 
der for the hand to be placed in the 
water (49). The reverse is true in 
early pull-through as the scapula 
downwardly rotates (49). However, 
propulsion in the pull-through phase 
is defined as the body gliding over 
the arm (3 1.57). Theoretically. this 
implies that stability is needed at the 
distal as well as the proximal seg- 
ments in order for the body to be 
propelled forward. Observation of 
JOSPT l Volume 20 Number 6 December 1994 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on August 12, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 1994 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.

CLINICAL COMMENTARY 
scapulothoracic rhythm during ac- 
tive range of motion is useful, but it 
may not demonstrate dysfunction in 
the unloaded shoulder. Therefore, it 
is equally important to observe the 
scapula under loaded conditions. 
Carefully watching the scapula dur- 
ing exercise may give a more appro- 
priate estimation of functional 
strength of the scapular muscles and 
the abnormal mechanics that occur 
with fatigue. 
Range of Motion 
Range of motion and laxity need 
to be identified in the swimmer with 
instability and impingement. Several 
authors discuss increased shoulder 
mobility as an etiology for shoulder 
dysfunction in swimmers, while still 
others discuss the lack of mobility as 
the means of dysfunction (2,20,29, 
3 1,38,54). Loss of motion can be 
due to tightness of the musculotendi- 
nous unit or from scarring and sub- 
sequent tightness of the ligamentous 
and capsular structures (46). Greipp 
was able to predict, with 93% accu- 
racy, shoulder pain in swimmers 
based on flexibility (20). However, 
Greipp used only a single test of 
anterior shoulder flexibility (20). 
The test position he described was 
with the athlete supine on a bench 
with both forearms fully pronated 
and both shoulders maximally ab- 
ducted horizontally. Greipp meas- 
ured the distance between the two 
palms as the arms were dropped 
down. He suggested that this test 
measured the flexibility of the supra- 
spinatus and the biceps (20). How- 
ever, this test position also reveals 
flexibility of the pectoralis muscula- 
ture (32). 
Beach et al studied collegiate 
swimmers and found excessive ROM 
in shoulder flexion, abduction, and 
external rotation and reported sig- 
nificant limitations in internal rota- 
tion (2). It is unknown if the changes 
in ROM are indicative of a painful 
shoulder because Beach et al found 
no correlation between pain and ROM. The limited internal rotation 
reported suggests that either the pos- 
terior capsule or the posterior cuff 
muscles may be tight, thus restricting 
motion. Harryman et al demon- 
strated that posterior capsular tight- 
ness can increase anterior humeral 
translation during flexion and hori- 
zontal adduction as well as increase 
superior humeral translation with 
forward flexion (23). Limitations in 
glenohumeral mobility may be com- 
pensated for by excessive scapular 
mobility (46). 
Cervical range of motion needs 
to be assessed, particularly rotation 
and extension, which are needed in 
order to take a breath. Limitations 
of cervical rotation may cause an ad- 
ditional need for body roll to one 
side, thus increasing the stress and 
time that the opposite shoulder has 
to spend in the water (48). 
Special Tests 
Special tests for joint instability 
and impingement also need to be in- 
cluded in the evaluation. Tests for 
glenohumeral instability include the 
apprehension test; relocation test; 
and assessment of anterior, inferior, 
and posterior drawer tests at 0, 45, 
and 90" of abduction (1 8,22,29,64). 
The apprehension test is performed 
at 90" of abduction, and the shoul- 
der is horizontally abducted and 
externally rotated. The test is con- 
sidered positive if the athlete demon- 
strates either pain or apprehension. 
The relocation test is performed in 
the same position using an anterior 
to posterior glide on the proximal 
humerus. A positive test is a reduc- 
tion of symptoms. indicating a theo- 
retical reduction of the joint. Shoul- 
der instability may be graded on a 
scale similar to the method used on 
the knee (Grades 1-3) (1 8,64). 
Tests for impingement include 
the impingement test. end range ab- 
duction test, and the Hawkin's test 
(22,24,42). The impingement test is 
performed by forward flexion and 
internal rotation of the humerus (42). A positive test is reproduction 
of symptoms. Pain at the end range 
of straight abduction is indicative of 
labral involvement (22). A positive 
Hawkin's test consists of pain with 
horizontal adduction at 90" of 
flexion (24). 
Strength 
It has been widely recognized 
that strength deficits of the rotator 
cuff musculature have serious impli- 
cations in either impingement or in- 
stability (2,22,23,27,42.46). How- 
ever, isokinetic strength testing for 
internal and external rotation is 
somewhat controversial (1 0.1 1.16, 
27,45,63). Results from isokinetic 
strength testing of the shoulder have 
significant limitations in interpreta- 
tion due to the varied testing posi- 
tions and protocols used in the re- 
search (10.1 1,16,27,45,63). A few 
studies have found a 3:2 ratio of in- 
ternal to external rotation strength 
in normal shoulders regardless of the 
test position or speed (2.16.27). Re- 
sults of nondominant vs. dominant 
shoulder strength vary according to 
various test results (10,11,27,45,63). 
Several studies have reported in- 
creased internal and external rota- 
tion strength ratios in swimmers, in 
which internal rotation strength had 
increased and external rotation 
strength had decreased (2.1 6.38). 
McMaster et al reported higher ad- 
duction/abduction and internall 
external strength ratios due to in- 
creased internal rotation and adduc- 
tion strength in competitive swim- 
mers (38). Falkel et al found similar 
results when using a prone testing 
position in order to make the testing 
more sports-specific (1 6). 
Beach et al reported a 3:2 inter- 
nal to external rotation strength 
ratio on a group of collegiate swim- 
mers hut found no significant differ- 
ences in dominant and nondominant 
shoulders, which is consistent with 
other studies (2). Interestingly, 
Beach et al found a high correlation 
between isokinetic endurance ratios 
Volutne 20 Number 6 December 1994 JOSPT 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on August 12, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 1994 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.

CLINICAL COMMENTARY 
and shoulder pain in this same popu- 
lation. They reported that swimmers 
with endurance ratios under 50% 
had subjective complaints of shoul- 
der pain, whereas swimmers with ra- 
tios above 80% had no incidence of 
pain (3). Additionally, the research 
suggests that endurance ratios may 
be a better indicator of relative func- 
tion because: I) swimmers may have 
a higher internal to external ratio bi- 
laterally, making bilateral strength 
comparisons less useful (2,63), and 2) 
endurance testing has been able to 
identify greater deficits than 
strength testing in swimmers (2). En- 
durance testing probably better re- 
flects the deficits seen in swimming, 
because swimming is an endurance- 
based sport. 
Evaluation of Swimming Stroke 
The swimming stroke can be 
evaluated on land by manual resist- 
ance through both recovery and 
pull-through phases to determine the 
athlete's tolerance to resistance in 
each position. Evaluation of the 
swimming stroke in the water should 
be done in conjunction with the 
coach. Watch for a dropped elbow 
during late recovery, which is the 
universal sign of fatigue. Observe 
the position of hand entry into the 
water. During hand entry, the shoul- 
der should be in internal rotation 
with the palm facing out. If the 
swimmer is complaining of pain dur- 
ing mid pull-through, an attempt 
should be made to determine if the 
arm is crossing the midline. The nat- 
ural style of some swimmers may 
vary without sacrificing speed or en- 
durance. Therefore, modification of 
stroke mechanics must be done cau- 
tiously so that productivity is not 
altered, particularly with elite 
swimmers. 
REHABILITATION 
Rehabilitation of swimmer's 
shoulder with instability/impinge- 
JOSPT Volume 20 Number 6 December 1994 ment overlap should consist of a 
multifaceted approach, with the 
main emphasis placed on restoring 
normal strength/endurance and mo- 
tion. The treatment program should 
be based on the findings of the 
ROM, strengthlendurance tests, and 
special test results. However, the ma- 
jority of swimmers may consistently 
show some or all of the sips and 
symptoms listed in Table 1. 
Range of Motion 
Flexibility exercises and mobili- 
7ation techniques should reflect the 
evaluation findings to increase mo- 
bility without producing greater in- 
stability. Limitations of horizontal 
adduction (less than 45" with the 
scapula stabilized) may be due to 
posterior capsule or posterior cuff 
muscle tightness (63). Stretching can 
be performed by stabilizing the scap 
ula on the thorax while crossing the 
arm over the chest. This stretch can 
be done at 90" of shoulder flexion 
and above and below 90" of shoul- 
der flexion in order to get all por- 
tions of the cuff. Mobihation of the 
posterior capsule can be performed 
with the shoulder in 90" of flexion 
with the elbow flexed. Pressure 
should be directed in an anterior to 
posterior fashion (Figure 3). FIGURE 3. Mobilization technique lor the posterior 
glenohumeral capsule. 
External rotation stretches can 
be done at varying degrees of abduc- 
tion (90". 135", and full abduction), 
using a wand or a light dumbbell to 
improve ROM (30.46). However, ex- 
ternal rotation at end range abduc- 
tion may not be as important as in- 
ternal rotation is for swimmers. 
Therefore, using a wand to stretch 
internal rotation at 90". 135", and 
end range abduction should also be 
Signs and Symptoms Possible Cause 
Postural deformities of rounded shoulders and Tightness of the pectoralis minor (32) 
thoracic kyphosis 
Weakness of the posterior cuff muscles and Weakness can be due to strength 
scapular stabilizers imbalances between the anterior 
and posterior muscles secondary to 
the demands of the sport and to 
stretch weakness (5,21, 32, 38) 
Limited internal rotation and excessive external Tightness of the posterior capsule or 
rotation range of motion posterior cuff muscles which causes 
a shift in the available range of 
motion (63) 
Decay of normal scapulothoracic rhythm Tightness of the anterior chest 
musculature and weakness of the 
scapular stabilizers 
TABLE 1. Typical signs and symptoms and possible causes of swimmer's shoulder. 
313 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on August 12, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 1994 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.

CLINICAL COMMENTARY 
included (Figure 4). Care should be 
taken in teaching the internal rota- 
tion exercises especially at 90" if the 
athlete has exhibited a positive im- 
piniement sign. 
Flexibility exercises for shoulder 
complex muscles should be a compo- 
nent of the rehabilitation program, including stretches for the pectoralis 
major and minor, upper trapezius, 
levator scapulae, biceps, triceps, and 
serratus anterior. Flexibility of the 
serratus anterior has not been dis- 
cussed in the literature, yet since the 
muscle is active throughout the en- 
tire stroke cycle, it may be at risk for 
FIGURE 4. Techniques to increase the range of internal rotation at A) 90" abduction, 
full abduction of the shoulder. B) 135' abduction, and C) fatigue (49). Therefore, the serratus 
anterior may be at risk for develop 
ing tightness because of prolonged 
activity. Although there is little em- 
pirical evidence to suggest a cause/ 
effect relationship between stretch- 
ing and increased motion, consistent 
attention to flexibility appears to in- 
crease motion. 
Shoulder range of motion in the 
cardinal planes may not be a good 
indicator of the degree of flexibility 
that is needed functionally for swim- 
ming. Freestyle stroke requires com- 
binations of movements not meas- 
ured by cardinal planar motions. For 
instance, during late recovery, the 
shoulder assumes a position of ab- 
duction and internal rotation. Dur- 
ing early recovery, external rotation, 
abduction, and horizontal abduction 
at the shoulder are needed. Finally, 
during mid pull-through, horizontal 
adduction and internal rotation are 
needed (49). However, at the pres- 
ent time, no specific flexibility stand- 
ards have been developed for free- 
style swimmers. Functional flexibility 
for swimmers is an area that requires 
future research. 
Strength and Endurance Training 
Progressive resistive exercises for 
swimmers need to promote equilib- 
rium between scapular and humeral 
movements. The strengthening pro- 
gram should emphasize correcting 
the imbalances that exist between 
the anterior and posterior shoulder 
musculature (2,30). Development of 
a strengthening program for swim- 
mers should have three primary con- 
siderations: 1) isolation of the rotator 
cuff muscles and other scapulohu- 
meral muscles, 2) muscular endur- 
ance, and 3) sports-specific function. 
Isolation of the rotator cuff dur- 
ing strengthening exercises is partic- 
ularly important for swimmers be- 
cause the results from EMG studies 
demonstrate that the cuff muscles 
act independent of each other dur- 
ing the stroke cycle (46). Recent 
EMG studies have identified optimal 
314 Volume 20 Number 6 December 1994 JOSPT 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on August 12, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 1994 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.

CLINICAL COMMENTARY 
exercise positions for each of the 
specific muscles. The supraspinatus 
muscle can be isolated during scap 
tion (abduction in the plane of the 
scapula) with internal or external ro- 
tation (3.61). The subscapularis ex- 
hibits considerable activity during 
flexion, scaption with internal or ex- 
ternal rotation, and abduction. The 
teres minor and infraspinatus can be 
isolated during prone horizontal ab- 
duction with either internal or exter- 
nal rotation of the humerus (3.61). 
Suggestions for strengthening the in- 
fraspinatus and teres minor are in- 
cluded in Table 2. Research on iso- 
kinetic testing suggests that the opti- 
mal ratio for internal/external 
rotation strength is 3:2 and that 
swimmers with greater than 80% en- 
durance ratios exhibit less pain (2). 
Poppen and Walker report that 
joint reaction forces increase with 
shoulder elevation up to 10 times 
the weight of the extremity at 90" 
(50). Therefore, the initial goals for 
Phase 1 rehabilitation should be to 
establish a stable scapular base and 
to strengthen the rotator cuff in the 
neutral position (Table 3). The pa- 
tient can be moved to higher de- 
grees of elevation based on their 
response to treatment. Phase I1 
emphasizes strengthening exercises 
in the 0-90" range. The push-up 
progression may be initiated late in 
Prone horizontal abduction with external rotation 
at 90,120, or 160' of abduction 
Prone horizontal abduction with external rotation 
and horizontal adduction with internal rotation 
at 160' of abduction (functional exercise for 
late recovery) 
Side lying external rotation-use towel under 
arm to prevent full glenohumeral adduction 
Theraband resisted external rotation at 30' of 
abduction 
External rotation at 90' of abduction with elbow 
supporting weight of shoulder (progression) 
TABLE 2. Strengthening exercises for the posterior 
rotator cuff muscles. Phase I1 if it is tolerated without in- 
creased complaints. Note that using 
a "plusn or an extra push into scapu- 
lar protraction at the end of these 
exercises has been reported to be ad- 
vantageous for strengthening the 
serratus anterior (Figures 5a and 5b) 
(40). Middle and lower trapezius 
strengthening can be accomplished 
by horizontal abduction with exter- 
nal rotation. However, these particu- 
lar exercises may not allow adequate 
eccentric resistance to the trapezius 
because of the interlinking cuff mus- 
cles. A modified "scapular roll" can 
be performed using a pull-down ma- 
chine, where the plane of movement 
is 45" anterior to the frontal plane, 
and the amount of weight used is not 
dependent on the strength of the ro- 
tator cuff muscles. During Phase 111. 
overhead exercises are initiated and 
are incorporated with functional 
training. Phase IV is a return to ath- 
letic activity, in which a gradual pro- 
gression is made up to full speed and 
yardage. 
Since swimming involves exces- 
sive repetition and muscular endur- 
ance, the strengthening program 
should reflect this. The average 
swimmer who swims 10.000 m daily 
completes a total of 4,000 revolu- 
tions per shoulder each day (49). 
The traditional three sets of 10 repe- 
titions appears to be inadequate. 
Therefore, use of lower weights and 
higher repetitions is suggested, espe- 
cially for rotator cuff exercises, so 
that the prime movers do not domi- 
nate. Whether the swimmer is a 
sprint, middle, or long distance 
swimmer should also be reflected in 
the number of repetitions chosen. 
The sprinter needs to develop power 
and explosiveness; therefore, higher 
weights and less repetitions may be 
advisable. Long distance swimmers 
swim for minutes at a time, so higher 
repetitions (20-50) or sets to failure 
of good exercise "form" may be indi- 
cated. There is no empirical evi- 
dence to suggest the exact number 
of sets or repetitions that will result 
in improved function. Proprioception and Functional 
Training 
Joint proprioception or kines- 
thesia in freestyle swimmers is an im- 
portant aspect of rehabilitation. Are 
the changes in the swimming pat- 
terns noted with painful shoulders 
intentional changes, or are these 
changes due to the fact that the 
swimmer is receiving inadequate 
feedback from the joint receptors 
due to capsular damage? Both Smith 
and Brunolli (59) and Lephart et al 
(34) have identified kinesthetic defi- 
cits in association with glenohumeral 
instability. Under normal circum- 
stances, proprioception occurs un- 
consciously and is derived from 
joint, muscle, and skin receptors 
(4 1). Proprioception has both a con- 
scious and an unconscious compo- 
nent. By having the athlete concen- 
trate on both humeral and scapular 
position during strengthening exer- 
cises and swimming, conscious pro- 
prioception might be enhanced. The 
swimmer might be more tuned into 
stroke mechanics. 
In theory, retraining of propri- 
oception should match the sports- 
specific stimulation of the joint and 
muscle receptors. Since swimming is 
an open kinetic chain activity, the 
exercises used should reflect this. 
Upper extremity plyometric exer- 
cises can be performed that utilize 
the myotactic "stretch" reflex and 
the series elastic component of the 
muscle tendon unit (l,4). Plyo- 
metrics are proposed to enhance 
power and explosiveness (4), but 
they may also help to improve "syn- 
chrony" of movement that is needed 
for the swimming stroke. These ex- 
ercises should be performed by grad- 
ually increasing the size of medicine 
balls. Various exercises can be uti- 
lized for swimmers, including chest, 
overhead, and side passes with medi- 
cine balls. The plyometric exercises 
should progress in speed, difficulty, 
repetitions, and weight. 
Closed chain activities may also 
be useful for functional training be- 
JOSPT * Volume 20 * Number 6 * December 1994 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on August 12, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 1994 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.

CLINICAL COMMENTARY 
cause they can mimic how the body 
is pulled over the arms during swim- 
ming (35). 
The swim bench, a device that 
resists the shoulder along the motion 
of the swimming stroke, can be used 
at later stages of rehabilitation. How- 
ever, caution must be advised to not 
overemphasize the swim bench too 
early in the rehabilitation sequence 
because it may further accentuate 
the imbalance between the anterior 
and posterior musculature. Research 
on the effectiveness of functional ac- 
tivities for the upper extremities is 
lacking, and the ideas presented here 
are based on clinical observation. 
Training Modification/Return 
to Sport 
Management of the swimmer 
with impingement and instability de- 
pends on the degree of dysfunction 
present. Frequently, management of 
swimmers during the season will in- 
clude modification of yardage to 
where symptoms are alleviated. The 
loads placed on the posterior cuff 
musculature during swimming are 
not extreme in nature but are repeti- 
tive and fatigue-related. Therefore, 
it may be feasible that athletes could be allowed to continue to swim, lim- 
iting yardage in the pain-free range. 
Falkel et al suggest that midseason 
management of a swimmer can be 
accomplished by decreasing yardage 
by half of the normal amount (1 5). 
Other training modifications include 
swimming a warm-up for a set time 
period instead of a set distance or 
allowing each swimmer to warm up 
at his or her own pace (3 1,54). In- 
creasing the rest intervals during and 
between training sessions may allow 
further recovery from fatigue (3 1). 
In addition, clinicians must work 
closely with coaches in order to de- 
termine and correct abnormal swim- 
ming technique. Swimmers should 
not increase their yardage greater 
than 10% a week in order to allow 
accommodation of the soft tissues. 
The coach must educate the swim- 
mers about their times (knowledge 
of results) as well as proper stroke 
mechanics (knowledge of perform- 
ance) (58). Both the coach and the 
swimmer need to clearly understand 
that with the first complaint of pain 
or fatigue (dropped elbow), the ath- 
lete must stop swimming in order for 
rehabilitation to be effective. 
SUMMARY 
r ~up~lurcp~~vc ~~cu~u~~~uxutat Iorutnotuwu v 8 
and 02 (Theraband or manual) 
Stmke-specific exercise 
Simulation of recovery (Table 2) 
Pull-through and reverse pull-through with 
Theraband 
Plyometric exercises 
Swim bench 
Phase IV-Return to Sport 
ER = External rotation, IR = Internal rotation. 
D I = Flexion, adduction, IR, 02 = Flexion, 
abduction, ER. 
TABLE 3. Basic guidelines for progression of 
treatment for swimmer's shoulders with secondary 
impingement. 
r 4 
FIGURE 5. A) Push-up. B) Push-up plus. Freestyle swimmers can present 
with signs and symptoms of either 
instability or impingement, or a com- 
bination of both. Historically, shoul- 
der impingement has been associated 
with limited shoulder mobility and 
instability with excessive mobility. 
However, secondary impingement is 
associated with excessive mobility 
due to nlenohumeral instability or <7 
rotator cuff dysfunction. The rotator 
cuff muscles are a primary source of 
stability at the glenohumeral joint. 
The rotator cuff can therefore affect 
or be affected by any disruption 
within the joint, ie., either instability 
or impingement. Accordingly, reha- 
bilitation needs to focus on provid- 
ing the ideal condition for the cuff 
muscles to perform, including ade- 
quate stability and mobility of the 
Volume 20 Number 6 December 1994 JOSPT 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on August 12, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 1994 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.

CLINICAL COMMENTARY 
scapula and appropriate strength- 
length relationships of all muscles in 
the shoulder complex. 
The mechanics of the swimming 
stroke place the shoulder in compro- 
mising positions. During mid pull- 
through, the shoulder is at risk for 
impingement; during late recovery, 
the issue of vascular impediment oc- 
curs. Additionally, during recovery, 
mechanical or secondary impinge- 
ment can occur. Rehabilitation of 
the swimmer's shoulder must pro- 
mote equilibrium of the shoulder 
complex while accounting for the de- 
mands of the sport. JOSPT 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors wish to acknowl- 
edge Chris Welling for his assistance 
with the illustrations and Charlie 
Olsen, PT, Frank Zawacki, and Elvin 
Pearrer for their assistance with the 
photographs. 
REFERENCES 
Albert M: Eccentric Muscle Training in 
Sports and Orthopedics, pp 45-73. 
New York: Churchill Livingstone Inc., 
1991 
Beach ML, Whitney SL, Dickoff-Hoffman 
SA: The correlation between shoulder 
flexibility, externallinternal rotation, 
abductionladduction strength and en- 
durance ratios to shoulder pain in com- 
petitive swimmers. I Orthop Sports Phys 
Ther 16(6):262-268, 1992 
Blackburn TA, McLeod WD, White 6, 
Wofford L: EMG analysis of posterior 
rotator cuff exercises. Athl Train 
25(1):4045, 1990 
Bosco C, Komi PV: Potentiation of the 
mechanical behavior of the skeletal 
muscle through pre-stretching. Acta 
Physiol Scand 106:467-469, 1979 
Cain PR, Mutschler TA, Fu FH, Lee SK: 
Anterior stability of the glenohumeral 
joint: A dynamic model. Am / Sports 
Med 15(2):144-147, 1987 
Clark I, Sidles /A, Matsen FA: The re- 
lationship of the glenohumeral joint 
capsule to the rotator cuff. Clin Orthop 
254:29-34, 1990 
Codman EA: The classic: Rupture of 
the supraspinatus tendon. Clin Orthop 
254:3-26, 1990 
Cofield RH, Irving IF: Evaluation and classification of shoulder instability. 
Clin Orthop 223:3243, 1987 
9. C~llins HR: Commentary on impinge- 
ment syndrome. Am I Sports Med 
8(3): 157- 158, 1980 
10. Cook EE, Gray VL, Savinar-Nogue E: 
Shoulder antagonistic strength ratios: 
A comparison between college-level 
baseball pitchers and nonpitchers. I 
Orthop Sports Phys Ther 8(9):451- 
461, 1987 
1 1. Cooper DE, Arnozky DVM, O'Brien ST, 
Warren RF, DeCarlo E, Allen AA: Anat- 
omy, histology, and vascularity of the 
glenoid labrum. 1 Bone loint Surg 
,':.4(1):46-52, 1992 
12. Counsilman jE: The Complete Book of 
Swimming, New York: Atheneum, 
1977 
13. Ciullo /V, Stevens CC: The prevention 
and treatment of injuries to the shoul- 
der in swimming. Sports Med 7: 182- 
204, 1989 
14. Dominguez RH: Shoulder pain in 
swimmers. Phys Sportsmed 8(7):37- 
42, 1980 
15. Falkel lE, Murphy TC: Case principles: 
Swimmer's shoulder. In: Malone TE 
(ed), Shoulder Injuries, Sport Injury 
Management, Vol 1, No 2, Baltimore, 
MD: Williams & Wilkins, 1988 
16. Falkel /E, Murphy TC, Murray TF: Prone 
positioning for testing shoulder inter- 
nal and external rotation on the Cybex 
I1 lsokinetic Dynamometer. I Orthop 
Sports Phys Ther 8(7):368-370, 1987 
17. Fu FH, Harner CD, Klein AH: Shoulder 
impingement syndrome: A critical re- 
view. Clin Orthop 269: 162- 1 73, 199 1 
18. Cerber C, Canz R: Clinical assessment 
of instability of the shoulder. I Bone 
loint Surg 668(4):55 1-556, 1 984 
19. Clousman R, lobe F, Tibone I, Moynes 
D, Antonelli D, Perry 1: Dynamic elec- 
tromyographic analysis of the throw- 
ing shoulder with glenohumeral insta- 
bility. / Bone loint Surg 70A(2):220- 
226, 1988 
20. Creipp IF: Swimmer's shoulder: The 
influence of flexibility and weight 
training. Phys Sportsmed 13(8):92- 
105, 1985 
21. Hall C: Hand paddles may cause 
shoulder pain. Swim World 2 1 (9):9- 
11, 1980 
22. Harner CD, Warner lP: Evaluation and 
treatment of rotator cuff pathology. 
Presented at the annual Southwestern 
Pennsylvania Physical Therapy Associ- 
ation Seminar, Pittsburgh, PA, March 
7, 1992 
23. Harryman DT, Sidles IA, Clark lM: 
Translation of the humeral head on 
the glenoid with passive glenohumeral 
motion. / Bone loint Surg 72A(9): 
1334- 1343, 1990 24. Hawkins RI, Kennedy IC: Impinge- 
ment syndrome in athletes. Am I 
Sports Med 8(3): 15 1 - 158, 1980 
25. Hawkins RI, Mohtadi NCH: Contro- 
versy in anterior shoulder instability. 
Clin Orthop 272: 152- 162, 199 1 
26. Howell SM, Gallenat VI: The glenoid- 
labrum socket: A constrained articular 
surface. Clin Orthop 243: 12?- 125, 
1989 
27. lvey FM, Calhoun lH, Rusche K, Bier- 
schenk I: lsokinetic testing of shoulder 
strength: Normal values. Arch Phys 
Med Rehabil66:384-386, 1985 
28. lobe FW: Commentary on impinge- 
mentlinstability. Am / Sports Med 
l8(4):375, 1 990 
29. lobe FW, Kvitne RS: Shoulder pain in 
the overhand or throwing athlete: The 
relationship of anterior instability and 
rotator cuff impingement. Orthop Rev 
l8(9):963-975, 1989 
30. lobe FW, Moynes DR: Delineation of 
diagnostic criteria and a rehabilitation 
program for rotator cuff injuries. Am 1 
Sports Med 10(6):336-339, 1982 
3 1. lohnson lE, Sim FH, Scott SC: Muscu- 
loskeletal injuries in competitive 
swimmers. Mayo Clin Proc 62:289- 
304, 1987 
32. Kendall FP, McCreary EK: Muscles: 
Testing and Function, Baltimore: Wil- 
liams & Wilkins, 1983 
33. Kummel BM: Spectrr~m of lesions of 
the anterior capsular mechanism of the 
shoulder. Am Sports Med 7(2): 1 1 1 - 
120, 1979 
34. Lephart SM, Warner lP, Borsa PA, 
Kocher M, Fu FH: Proprioceptive and 
kinesthetic awareness in individuals 
with shoulder instability. Presented at 
the annual meeting of the American 
Orthopaedic Society for Sports Medi- 
cine, Sun Valley, ID, luly 12- 15, 1993 
35. Maglischo EW: Swimming Faster, pp 
1-99. Mountain View, CA: Mayfield 
Publishing Company, 1982 
36. Matsen FA, Harryman DT, Sidles /A: 
Mechanics of glenohumeral instability. 
Clin Sports Med 10(4):783-788, 199 1 
37. McMaster WC: Anterior glenoid la- 
brum damage: A painful lesion in 
swimmers. Am 1 Sports Med 
14(5):383-387, 1986 
38. McMaster WC, Long SC, Ciazzo VS: 
Shoulder torque changes in the swim- 
ming athlete. Am I Sports Med 
20(3):323-327, 1992 
39. Morrison DS, Bigliani LU: The clinical 
significance of variations in acromial 
morphology. Orthop Trans 254:35- 
38, 1987 
40. Moseley 16, lobe FW, Pink M, Perry 1, 
Tibone I: EMC analysis of the scapular 
muscles during a shoulder rehabilita- 
tion program. Am I Sports Med 
JOSPT Volume 20 Number 6 December 1994 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on August 12, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 1994 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.

CLINICAL COMMENTARY 
20(2): 128- 134, 1992 
4 1. Mountcastle VD fed), Medical Physi- 
ology, Vol 1, (13th Ed), St Louis: C.V. 
Mosby Company, 1973 
42. Neer CS: Impingement lesions. Clin 
Orthop 173:70-77, 1983 
43. Nuber GW, lobe FW, Perry I, Antonelli 
D: Fine wire electromyography analy- 
sis of muscles of the shoulder during 
swimming. Am I Sports Med 14(1):7- 
11, 1986 
44. O'Connell PW, Nuber GW, Mileski 
RA, Lautenschalger E: The contribu- 
tions ofthe glenohumeral ligaments to 
anterior stability of the shoulder. Am I 
Sports Med 18(6):579-584, 1990 
45. Otis IC, Warren RF, Backus SI, Santner 
TI, Mabrey ID: Torque production in 
the shoulder of the young males. Am 
I Sports Med l8(2): 1 19- 123, 1990 
46. Pappas AM, Zawacki RM, McCarthy C: 
Rehabilitation of the pitching shoul- 
der. Am I Sports Med 13(4):223-235, 
1985 
47. Pappas AM, Zawacki RM, Sullivan TI: 
Biomechanics of baseball pitching: A 
preliminary report. Am / Sports Med 
48. Penny IN, Smith C: The prevention and 
treatment of swimmer's shoulder. Can 
I Appl Sports Sci 5(3): 195-202, 1980 
49. Pink M, Perry I, Browne A, Scovazzo 
ML, Kerrigan I: The normal shoulder during freestyle swimming: An electro- 
myographic and cinematographic 
analysis of twelve muscles. Am I Sports 
Med 19(6):569-576, 199 1 
50. Poppen NK, Walker PS: Forces at the 
glenohumeral joint in abduction. Clin 
Orthop 58: 165- 182, 1978 
5 1. Rathbun 16, MacNab I: The microvasc- 
ular patterns of the rotator cuff. I Bone 
loint Surg 528(3):540-553, 1970 
52. Richardson AR: The biomechanics of 
swimming: The shoulder and knee. 
Clin Sports Med 5(l): 103- 1 13, 1986 
53. Richardson AR, lobe FW, Collins HR: 
The shoulder in competitive swim- 
ming. Am I Sports Med 8(3): 159- 163, 
1980 
54. Rowe CR, Zarins 6: Recurrent transient 
subluxation of the shoulder. 1 Bone 
loint Surg 63A(6):863-872, 198 1 
55. Saha AK: Mechanics of elevation of the 
glenohumeral joint. Acta Orthop 
Scand 44:668-678, 1973 
56. Sarrafin SK: Cross and functional anat- 
omy of the shoulder. Clin Orthop 
173:11-19, 1983 
57. Scavazzo ML, Browne A, Pink M: The 
painful shoulder during freestyle swim- 
ming: An electromyographic analysis 
of twelve muscles. Am I Sports Med 
19(6):577-582, 1991 
58. Schmidt RA: Motor Learning and Con- trol, Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics 
Publishers, 1982 
59. Smith RL, Brunolli S: Shoulder kines- 
thesia after anterior glenohumeral 
joint dislocation. Phys Ther 11(11): 
507-5 13, 1990 
60. Travel1 /G, Simons DG: Myofascial Pain 
and Dysfunction: The Trigger Point 
Manual, Baltimore, MD: Williams & 
Wilkins, 1983 
6 1. Townsend H, lobe FW, Pink M: Elec- 
tromyographic analysis of the gleno- 
humeral muscles during a baseball re- 
habilitation program. Am I Sports Med 
19(3):264-272, 199 1 
62. TurkelS1, Panio MW, Marshall /L, Cir- 
gis FC: Stabilizing mechanisms pre- 
venting anterior dislocation of the 
shoulder. I Bone loint Surg 676: 1208- 
1215, 1981 
63. Warnerll, Micheli LI, Arslanian LE: Pat- 
terns of flexibility, laxity, and strength, 
in normal shoulders and shoulders 
with instability and impingement. Am 
I Sports Med 18(4):366-375, 1990 
64. Warren RF: Subluxation of the shoul- 
der in athletes. Clin Sports Med 
2(2):339-354, 1983 
65. Williams PL, Warwick R, Dyson M, 
Bannister LH (eds), Gray's Anatomy, 
New York: Churchill Livingstone Inc., 
1989 
Volume 20 Number 6 December 1994 0JOSPT 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on August 12, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 1994 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.

