See discussions, st ats, and author pr ofiles f or this public ation at : https://www .researchgate.ne t/public ation/13067148
The basics of synchronized swimming and its inju ries
Article    in  Clinics in Sports Medicine  · May 1999
DOI: 10.1016/S0278-5919(05)70148-4  · Sour ce: PubMed
CITATIONS
42READS
8,924
1 author:
Mar go Mountjo y
McMast er Univ ersity
221 PUBLICA TIONS    14,958  CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
All c ontent f ollo wing this p age was uplo aded b y Mar go Mountjo y on 24 Januar y 2018.
The user has r equest ed enhanc ement of the do wnlo aded file.
AQUATIC SPORTS INJURIES AND REHABILITATION 0278-5919/99 $8.00 + .OO 
THE BASICS OF SYNCHRONIZED 
SWIMMING AND ITS INJURIES 
Margo Mountjoy, MD, CCFP, Dip Sport Med 
Have you ever jumped into the water and tried to twirl your feet in the air 
without drowning? How do synchronized swimmers make it look so effortless? 
For many, when thinking of synchronized swimming, an image of young 
women in sequins floating in patterns on the water often comes to mind. 
Although this may have been true in the 1940s, today at the turn of the century 
it is far from the truth. Synchronized swimming has evolved into a complex, 
highly developed, physically intensive sport. 
Synchronized swimming encompasses many attributes of sport: strength, 
power, flexibility, endurance, artistic expression, and performance. As a result of 
this complexity, the demands on the athlete are numerous, often resulting in 
injuries unique to the sport itself. As a sport medicine clinician, it is important 
to understand the basic structure of the sport, the demands on the synchronized 
swimmer, and the common injuries encountered. 
HISTORICAL REVIEW 
Synchronized swimming originated in the early 1900s. It was developed first 
by Annette Kellerman of the United States.17 The sport, then called “ornamental 
swimming,” was made famous by the Esther Williams movies in the United 
States. At that time, the focus of the sport was entertainment value,The routines 
were composed often of many floating patterns and visual effects. 
Synchronized swimming left Hollywood and became a competitive sport 
with the development of International regulations by Federation Internationale 
de Natation Amateur (FINA) in 1952. Synchronized swimming was introduced 
first to the Olympics as a demonstration sport in 1948, and became an event in 
From the Canadian Synchronized Swimming Team, Synchro Canada, Gloucester; the 
University of Guelph Sports Medicine Clinic, Guelph; and the South City Sports 
Medicine Clinic, Guelph, Ontario, Canada 
CLINICS IN SPORTS MEDICINE 
VOLUME 18 * NUMBER 2 APRIL 1999 321 
322 MOUNTJOY 
the Pan American Games in 1969.3 Canada and the United States dominated the 
sport during the 1970s and 1980s. 
Synchronized swimming became an Olympic event at the 1984 Olympic 
Games in Los Angeles, United States, with the inclusion of the solo and duet 
events. The 1988 Olympics in Seoul, Korea, and the 1992 Olympics in Barcelona, 
Spain, also included the solo and duet events. The team event was introduced 
to Olympic competition at the 1996 Olympic Games in Atlanta, United States. 
Canada and the United States dominated all of these Olympic Games. 
During the 1990s, synchronized swimming has grown and developed in 
many other countries, resulting in more competition for the strong North Ameri- 
can countries. Russia recently dominated the 1998 World Aquatic Champion- 
ships. Japan has traditionally been and, currently is, a medal contender. Other 
European, Pacific, and South American countries recently have produced elite 
synchronized swimmers. 
Currently, FINA recognizes synchronized swimming programs in 59 coun- 
tries. In Canada alone, there are approximately 20,000 participants. These com- 
petitors range from elite to recreational athletes. There is an active International 
Masters program in many countries. There is also participation by male athletes 
in synchronized swimming. 
COMPETITIVE STRUCTURE 
Internationally, the rules and regulations for synchronized swimming origi- 
nate from FINA. The FINA bureau is composed of representatives from 21 
countries. A division of FINA known as the Technical Synchronized Swimming 
Committee meets annually to constantly revise and redefine the sport as it 
evolves. This committee consists of representatives from 12 countries. 
The most important international event for synchronized swimming is the 
Olympic Games. Currently, the team and duet events are scheduled for the 2000 
Games in Sydney, Australia. Other FINA events include the World Aquatic 
Championships, Junior World Championships, and World A and B Cups. Re- 
gional competitive events include the Commonwealth Games, Pan American 
Games, and the Pan Pacific Games. 
International competitions include three events: solo, duet, and team. The 
figure event recently has been excluded as a competitive event at the senior 
level. At international competitions, the solo event is composed of two 
routines-a technical and a free routine. The technical routine is 2 minutes in 
duration, and must include approximately 6 to 10 required elements or set 
movements in a predetermined order. The mandatory technical elements illus- 
trate the athlete’s flexibility, strength, skill, power, and control. Elements chosen 
include arm movements, boosts, spins, splits, vertical twists, and figure skills. 
The required elements are changed by FINA every 4 years. The free routine is 3 
minutes and 30 seconds in duration. There are no predetermined required 
elements, thereby allowing the athlete to express her interpretation of the music 
and skill in any means she chooses (Fig. l).18 
The duet event also is composed of a technical and a free routine. The 
technical routine is 2 minutes and 20 seconds in length. Although the chosen 
elements for the duet are different from the solo, they also similarly demonstrate 
the athlete’s strength, flexibility, power, control, and skill. The free routine is 4 
minutes in duration, and freedom of interpretation and expression is allowed. 
In the duet event, unlike the solo event, emphasis is on synchronization with 
THE BASICS OF SYNCHRONIZED SWIMMING AND ITS INJURIES 323 
Figure 1. Canadian Sylvie Frechette, gold medal soloist at the 1992 Barcelona Olympic 
Games. (Courtesy of Canadian Sport Images, Gloucester, Ontario, Canada.) 
each other as well as the music. Intricate patterns and positions made possible 
by two people are encouraged (Fig. 2).18 
The team event, which tends to be the most popular with spectators, also 
has a technical and a free routine component. The usual number of athletes in 
the team event is eight, with one or two alternate swimmers who would compete 
in the necessity of illness or injury. The technical routine is 2 minutes and 50 
seconds in duration. The required elements in the team event are more complex 
in that they include specific patterns and timed moves. The othe: elements, as 
in solo and duet, are chosen to reflect skill, flexibility, power control, and 
strength. The free routine is 5 minutes in duration, and it also has no required 
elements. Synchronization is a large component of this competition because 
there are more athletes to coordinate. With the larger number of athletes, there 
is greater freedom in developing exciting high-risk boosts where one or more 
athletes is lifted out of the water, while being supported by a network of other 
teammates under the water (Fig. 3).18 
JUDGING CRITERIA 
As with other artistic sports, such as figure skating, diving, and gymnastics, 
synchronized swimming is a judged sport. The judges at international events 
are selected from participating countries. Each judge must have attained the 
highest level of judging competence in their respective countries and must be 

Figure 2. Duet competitors in an underwater joining figure-a difficult, high-risk move, which 
is rewarded accordingly. (Courtesy of Synchro Canada, Gloucester, Ontario, Canada.) 
Figure 3. The team event demonstrating a modified crane position. It is imperative that the 
athletes have the same angle of leg, at the same time, while maintaining their pattern 
underwater. (Courtesy of Synchro Canada, Gloucester, Ontario, Canada.) 
324 

THE BASICS OF SYNCHRONIZED SWIMMING AND ITS INJURIES 325 
accepted as competent by FINA. Judges are constantly evaluated by FINA to 
ensure that standards of competence are being met. 
At all international events, there are two judging panels, each comprised of 
seven judges with one alternate judge. One panel of judges is responsible for 
evaluating and awarding a score for Technical Merit for each routine, and the 
other panel of judges is responsible for evaluating and awarding a score for 
artistic impression for each routine.1s 
The technical merit score comprises three criteria for evaluation. The first 
criterion is the quality of the ”execution of strokes, figures, propulsion tech- 
niques and precision of patterns.” In the solo event, execution is worth 50%, 
and in the duet and team events, execution is worth 40%. The second criterion 
is ”synchronization with one another and with music.” This comprises 10% of 
the technical merit score in solo, 20% for duet, and 30% for team. The final 
criterion of evaluation is the ”difficulty of the strokes/figures/patterns and 
synchronization.” Difficulty comprises 40% of the solo and duet technical merit 
score, and 30% for team.I8 
The artistic impression score also comprises three criteria for evaluation. 
The first criterion is the ”choreography” of the routine. The judge looks for 
variety, creativity, intricate and unique patterns and transitions, and pool cover- 
age. This criterion is worth 50% of the artistic impression score in the solo event 
and 60% in the duet and team events. The next criterion is ”music interpreta- 
tion,” which is allotted 20% of the artistic impression score in all three events. 
The final criterion of evaluation for the artistic impression score is the “manner 
of presentation.” The manner of presentation comprises 30% of the solo artistic 
impression score and 20% for duet and team.I8 
Each judge on both the technical merit and artistic impression panels awards 
a mark out of 10 based on the above criteria. The highest and the lowest mark 
awarded for both the technical merit and artistic impression scores are deleted. 
The mark is then tallied, as a total of the remaining five judges’ numbers. The 
total score for the event, whether it be the technical or the free routine, comprises 
60% of the technical merit score and 40% of the artistic impression score.18 
The final championship score for the solo, duet, or team event is determined 
by the computation of the technical routine marks at 35% and the free routine 
marks weighted at 65Y0.’~ 
TRAINING REQUIREMENTS 
Most synchronized swimmers enter the sport as young girls at the recre- 
ational level. By the age of 13 to 15 years, the athletes who are more serious or 
talented may choose to train and compete at a more intense competitive level. 
In many countries, athletes that are at the National Team calibre of competence 
often train in congregated centers ensuring uniform training, adequate time 
together to perfect synchronization, and more effective resource use. 
The components of a synchronized swimmer’s training include aerobic 
and anaerobic fitness, strength, power, endurance, flexibility, sport specific skill 
perfection, artistic expression, and performance skill. Balancing these compo- 
nents to maximize output without producing overuse injuries is a major task for 
all National Team coaches, in consultation and conjunction with their respective 
sport science specialists. Most National Team coaches have undergone educa- 
tional programs to equip themselves with the knowledge in general coaching 
principles and sport-specific skills. 
326 MOUNTJOY 
As a sports medicine physician, one may be involved at the planning level 
to facilitate coordination and prevent overuse injuries. One also may be involved 
in the ongoing monitoring of the swimmers to advise changes in training to 
prevent overtraining fatigue or to determine early injury intervention, thereby 
preventing chronic or serious injury. Other experts involved in the planning and 
training implementation of the elite synchronized swimmer may include sports 
physiologists, weight-training experts, sports therapists, gymnastics, or dance 
coaches to facilitate flexibility and artistic interpretation, sports nutritionists, and 
sports psychologists. 
Aerobic and anaerobic fitness are achieved through a variety of means, 
including running, cycling, aerobic dance, or swimming. Strength and power 
training are achieved through a sport specific weight-training program. Flexibil- 
ity training is a daily part of the training regimen of the synchronized swimmer. 
Sport specific skill acquisition is aequired through direct teaching by coaches 
and fellow senior swimmers. The types of skills trained are determined by the 
competitive event and by the level of competition. 
Synchronization to each other and the music in the routine events is ac- 
quired through repetitive practice, often using a video camera to illustrate errors 
to the athlete. Many coaches use an underwater microphone to give corrections 
during training. Synchronized swimmers also acquire synchronization through 
an exercise called “dry land drill,” whereby the athletes simulate all in-water 
movements on land, to the music, with various actions. 
Artistic expression often is developed with the assistance of dance choreog- 
raphers. Performance skill is practiced through repetition and experience, often 
in the format of demonstrations or mock competitions with volunteer judges 
providing feedback. 
At the elite level, the synchronized swimmer would train 6 days per week. 
One day off is recommended for physical and psychologic recovery. The training 
sessions run from 3 to 5 hours in duration. Two training sessions of different 
content per day may occur. For example, sport-specific skill training in the water 
could follow a pool session of swimming for aerobic fitness. Later in the same 
day, a dry land training session could occur consisting of flexibility, dry land 
drill, or a psychology session. A skilled coach must balance the training so as 
not to overload the athlete, and also not to overtrain a specific body part, which 
could potentially lead to overuse injuries. 
The training components listed previously are then balanced over the train- 
ing season to produce the desired result., at competition time. This balance is 
called periodization. For example, early season training includes weight lifting 
for strength and specific individual body shaping. Flexibility and cardiovascular 
fitness also are emphasized during the early season training regimen. As the 
season progresses and the routines are choreographed, more sport-specific skills 
are trained. Presentation and synchronization occur at this stage of the training. 
A basic weight-training program is maintained, as is an aerobic fitness program, 
although they are weighted less in time and priority. Before competition, taper- 
ing occurs where the athlete trains in more sport specific skills/routines, with 
less of the other training demands. The intensity and duration of the training 
sessions also are decreased to allow recovery and maximize competition results. 
REVIEW OF COMMON MUSCULOSKELETAL INJURIES AND 
THEIR MANAGEMENT 
As in all aspects of sports medicine, familiarity with the common injuries 
for each specific sport facilitates the medical management of the athlete. This 
THE BASICS OF SYNCHRONIZED SWIMMING AND ITS INJURIES 327 
knowledge can ensure adequate prevention through a balanced training regi- 
men, or if this is not possible, a regular surveillance program with early recogni- 
tion and effective treatment to prevent the development of a chronic injury. 
Chronic injuries in synchronized swimmers can lead not only to missed valuable 
training time and subsequent substandard competitive performance, but also to 
advanced personal injury. 
Trauma 
Synchronized swimming was once thought of as a noncontact sport, where 
its injuries were acquired from either outside the sport or from repetitive chronic 
overuse injuries.I7 With the recent advances in high-risk boosts and throws, there 
is an increase in the incidence of traumatic injuries. To throw or support the 
athlete above the water, the teammates closely stack under the water, thereby 
increasing the potential for acute hematomas, contusions, sprains, disc hernia- 
tions, and fractures. Serious head injuries with post-concussive syndrome also 
have been seen (Fig. 4). 
Acute tears of muscles and tendons occur with the increase in high-speed, 
ballistic movements. The ”rocket” (a quick vertical thrust followed by an explo- 
sive move to the split position) is responsible for acute groin, hamstring, and 
quadriceps strains. 
The three most common musculoskeletal overuse injuries encountered in 
clinical practice among elite and recreational synchronized swimmers are shoul- 
der instability problems, lumbar strains, and patellofemoral syndrome. 
Figure 4. The team “boost and throw” is a skill with high potential for trauma owing to the 
height of the thrown athlete. Note the height of the thrown athlete and the stacked 
supporting athletes underwater. (Courtesy of Canadian Sport Images, Gloucester, Ontario, 
Canada.) 


THE BASICS OF SYNCHRONIZED SWIMMING AND ITS INJURIES 329 
cate with the coach and the athlete to educate and to develop a training schedule 
that is effective yet will not inhibit the healing of the injury. Kicking with the 
arms at the side is an appropriate in-water activity, along with running or 
cycling for fitness.'* 
To decrease inflammation, icing the shoulder before and after training is 
recommended. Anti-inflammatory medication may provide symptom relief as 
necessary. Once the athlete is symptom free and the strength of the humeral and 
scapular control muscles has been achieved, the athlete can return to sport- 
specific activities. This should occur in a graduated stepwise, controlled manner. 
A gradual reintroduction to training will prevent early relapse of this injury.14 
Lumbar Strain 
As in gymnastics, dance, and diving, synchronized swimming demands 
great flexibility in the lumbar spine. An important technical element in synchro- 
nized swimming is the "walkout" from the split position that requires tremen- 
dous lumbar hyperextension (Fig. 5). Figure 6 illustrates the flexibility demands 
on the lumbar spine. 
The pathophysiology underlying the lumbar pain is unclear. Proposed sug- 
gestions include facet inflammation, tight or weak abdominal and hip flexor 
muscles, poor pelvic posture, and overuse. In synchronized swimming, it also is 
possible that the pain is a result of poor muscular control of the lumbar spine 
at the speed that activities are performed.8 Split boosts require the athlete to 
thrust vertically at maximum speed and split at the height of acceleration in a 
ballistic movement. The development of spondylolysis and spondylolisthesis as 
seen in elite gymnastics is not common in synchronized swimming. 
The athlete will present with aching pain in the lumbar area with an absence 
of neurologic symptoms. The pain is exacerbated by activity, especially with 
hyperextension as seen in repetitive walkouts. Physical findings on examination 
may include palpable spasm of the erector spinae, evidence of facet inflamma- 
tion on extension, tight iliopsoas and quadriceps muscle groups, hypomobility 
of the spine, and abnormal lumbar and pelvic posture. It is important to rule 
out other causes of back pain excluding the presence of boney, discogenic, or 
intra-abdominal pathologies. Radiologic evaluation most likely will be negative. 
Treatment of this injury must include athlete and coaching education. Modi- 
fication of the frequency, force, speed, and degree of hyperextension while in 
the acute phase is necessary. Maximizing flexibility of the surrounding muscula- 
ture is essential as well as strengthening of the appropriate muscle groups to 
ensure spinal stabilization. Correction of the postural abnormalities and hypo- 
mobility is recommended. The use of ice, anti-inflammatory medication, and 
b n 
Figure 5. The walkout figure from the split position requires extensive hyperextension of 
the lumbar spine. (From Werner G (ed): FINA Handbook. Lausanne, FINA, 1998, p 276; 
with permission.) 

330 MOUNTJOY 
Figure 6. Extensive repetition of extreme lumbar spine hyperextension (a position that is 
required and encouraged in synchronized swimming) can lead to lumbar strain syndrome. 
(Courtesy of Synchro Canada, Gloucester, Ontario, Canada.) 
physiotherapy modalities (including transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation 
and ultrasound) will assist in pain control.8 
Patellofemoral Syndrome 
Anterior knee pain also is present in the synchronized swimmer. There is 
no published data outlining its prevalence in the sport. In clinical practice with 
the elite athlete, the incidence of patellofemoral syndrome appears to be declin- 
ing. This may be due to the increased awareness of the disorder and the 
subsequent development of intensive and balanced lower limb weight-training 
programs. Patellofemoral syndrome is still a common finding in the recre- 
ational athlete. 
The origin of this disorder is controversial and obscure.11 The pathology is 
reported in the literature by some to be due to the malalignment of the patella." 
Others believe that vastus medialis oblique weakness occurs secondary to a 
biomechanical tracking disorder, thus resulting in cartilaginous changes? 
In synchronized swimming, patellofemoral syndrome most likely is the 
result of an overuse injury from excessive repetitive use of the eggbeater kick (a 
modified whip kick) in the predisposed athlete. Eggbeater also is associated 
sometimes with a chronic strain of the medial collateral ligament. Eggbeater is 
used to enable the athlete to raise his or her arms and body above the water. By 
altering the angle of the hips and legs, the eggbeater kick will move the athlete 
in all directions (Fig. 7). 
Symptoms of patellofemoral syndrome include diffuse anterior knee pain 

THE BASICS OF SYNCHRONIZED SWIMMING AND ITS INJURIES 331 
Figure 7. The eggbeater kick produces tremendous out-of-water height. For the predis- 
posed athlete, overuse of the eggbeater kick can lead to patellofemoral syndrome. (Cour- 
tesy of Synchro Canada, Gloucester, Ontario, Canada.) 
of insidious onset. It is exacerbated by stair climbing and descending, squatting, 
and prolonged sitting. Intensive eggbeater drills also will increase symptomatol- 
oev. ", Examination findings include abnormal patellar movements and location. 
There may be patellar apprehension and pain elicited on patellar compression. 
Squatting will exacerbate the pain. Assessment of the strength and flexibility of 
the quadriceps muscle group may show weakness in the vastus medialis oblique, 
imbalance in the hamstring and quadriceps, and inflexibility. Examination of the 
feet may reveal pes planus with pronation. It is essential to rule out other intra- 
and extra-articular pathologies of the knee as well as back, hip, and ankle 
di~orders.~ 
There is consensus in the literature to support the recommendation of initial 
conservative treatment resulting in satisfactory outcomes at long-term follow- 
up." Management includes patient education, modification of activity, quadri- 
ceps muscle strengthening and balancing, improving flexibility, and bracing or 
McConnell taping of the patella. The use of ice and anti-inflammatory medica- 
tion is beneficial for the control of swelling and pain. Correction of malalignment 
of the foot with orthotics is recommended, if indicated. Surgical arthroscopy is 
not necessary in the initial treatment of patellofemoral ~yndrome.~ 

332 MOUNTJOY 
REVIEW OF COMMON MEDICAL PROBLEMS 
AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 
In addition to the musculoskeletal injuries listed previously, there are also 
specific medical issues that are common, although not exclusive, to synchronized 
swimmers. As a sports medicine physician, it is important to approach and 
evaluate the synchronized swimmer’s medical status and his or her musculoskel- 
etal status. A review of the five most common medical concerns that are encoun- 
tered in clinical practice follows. 
H ypoxia 
Synchronized swimmers perform vigorous exercise, often during prolonged 
periods of breath holding. This can lead to hypoxia resulting in fainting, confu- 
sion, disorientation, and dizziness. Swimmers are rewarded by the judges for 
slowly performed figures during the figure competition, and for long periods of 
underwater sequences during the technical and free routines. At the elite level, 
many athletes who have fainted in the water following long periods of submer- 
sion have had to be retrieved. 
One prospective study from Great Britain by Davies et a1 in 1995 studied 
this issue with the 1992 British Olympic Team. A clear correlation between 
duration of breath holding and ranking was discovered in the figure competition 
and in the free routine? Also measured were alveolar gases following the free 
routine, revealing profound hypoxia with central cyanosis and confusion. There 
was no hypercapnia found.6 
This issue of hypoxia in synchronized swimming is one that demands 
further study, discussion, and subsequent rule modification to ensure athlete 
safety. 
Eating Disorders 
As in other judged aesthetic performance sports such as figure skating, 
dance, and gymnastics, eating disorders are present in synchronized swimming. 
Although there is no published data establishing the statistical prevalence of 
eating disorders in synchronized swimming, it is evident in clinical practice. 
Eating disorders tend to occur predominantly in females. Their onset is 
usually in adolescence or early adult life. Electrolyte imbalance, dehydration, 
substance abuse, and even death in advanced anorexia nervosa (15%-21%) may 
be complications of these disorders. There may be a positive family history.’ 
The two main types of eating disorders include anorexia nervosa and 
bulimia nervosa. According to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual IV (DSM- 
IV), anorexia nervosa is diagnosed by the presence of the criteria outlined in 
Table 2. The DSM IV diagnoses bulimia nervosa by the criteria outlined in 
Table 3. 
Education of coaches and other professionals regarding the prevention and 
precipitation of eating disorders is an important role of the sports medicine 
physician. Erroneous coaching and judging comments or actions can precipitate 
eating disorders in an athlete who is predisposed. It is also essential to encourage 
the coaches and athletes to choose weight goals and body fat measurements that 
are within a realistic physiologic range. Daily weight measurements by coaches 
should be discouraged strongly. By enlisting the assistance of clinical sports 
THE BASICS OF SYNCHRONIZED SWIMMING AND ITS INJURIES 333 
Table 2. IV DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA FOR ANOREXIA NERVOSA DIAGNOSTIC AND 
STATISTICAL MANUAL (DSM) 
A. Refusal to maintain body weight at or above a minimally normal weight for age and 
height (i.e., weight loss leading to maintenance of body weight less than 85% of that 
expected; or failure to make expected weight gain during a period of growth, leading 
to body weight less than 85% of that expected). 
8. Intense fear of gaining weight or becoming fat, even when underweight. 
C. Disturbance in the way one’s body weight or shape is perceived; undue influence of 
body weight or shape on self-evaluation, or denial of the seriousness of the current 
low body weight. 
menstrual cycles. (A woman is considered to have amenorrhea if her periods occur 
only following hormone, e.g., estrogen, administration.) D. Amenorrhea in postmenarcheal females, i.e., the absence of at least three consecutive 
Specify type: 
Restricting Type: During the current episode of anorexia nervosa, the person has not 
engaged regularly in binge-eating or purging behavior (i.e., self-induced vomiting or 
the misuse of laxatives, diuretics, or enemas) 
Binge-Eating and Purging Type: During the current episode of anorexia nervosa, the 
person has regularly engaged in binge-eating or purging behavior (i.e., self-induced 
vomiting or the misuse of laxatives, diuretics, or enemas) 
From American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, ed 
4. Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Association, 1994, pp 544-545; with permission. 
Table 3. DIAGNOSTIC AND STATISTICAL MANUAL (DSM) IV DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA 
FOR BULIMIA NERVOSA 
~ ~ 
A. Recurrent episodes of binge eating. An episode of binge eating is characterized by 
both of the following: 
1. Eating, in a discrete period (eg., within any 2-hour period), an amount of food 
that is definitely larger than most people would eat during a similar period of 
time and under similar circumstances 
2. A sense of lack of control over eating during the episode (e.g., a feeling that one 
cannot stop eating or control what or how much one is eating) 
B. Recurrent, inappropriate compensatory behavior in order to prevent Geight gain, 
such as self-induced vomiting, misuse of laxatives, diuretics, enemas, or other 
medications, fasting, or excessive exercise. at least twice a week for 
3 months. C. The binge eating and inappropriate compensatory behaviors both occur, on average, 
D. Self-evaluation is unduly influenced by body shape and weight. 
E. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during episodes of anorexia nervosa. 
Specify type: 
Purging Type: During the current episode of bulimia nervosa, the person has regularly 
engaged in self-induced vomiting or the misuse of laxatives, diuretics, or enemas. 
Nonpurging Type: During the current episode of bulimia nervosa, the person has used 
other inappropriate compensatory behaviors, such as fasting or excessive exercise, but 
has not engaged regularly in self-induced vomiting or the misuse of laxatives, 
diuretics, or enemas. 
From American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, ed 
4. Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Association, 1994, pp 549450; with permission. 

334 MOUNTJOY 
nutritionists, one can assure that the synchronized swimmer is eating an appro- 
priate balance of nutrients as well as an appropriate caloric intake for the energy 
expenditure. 
Further education regarding early recognition of eating disorders is im- 
portant. By informing athletes, coaches, and parents of the warning signs and 
symptoms of eating disorders, one can ensure early diagnosis and treatment. 
When assessing the athlete with an eating disorder, it is important also to assess 
for the presence of affective disorders. Depression is a common finding in 
association with eating disorders in clinical practice. Suicide risk assessment is 
essential, and suicidal ideation must be taken seriously. 
When treating the athlete with an eating disorder, it is imperative to enlist 
the cooperation of the athlete, the coach, and often the athlete’s family (within 
the boundaries of patient confidentiality). The use of antidepressants may be 
necessary in the presence of a concomitant major affective disorder. Referral to 
a sports psychologist or a psychiatrist trained in the treatment of eating disorders 
often is necessary for the successful treatment of these disorders. 
Female Athlete Triad 
The female athlete triad is a syndrome where the identified athlete has the 
following three features: 
1. Disordered eating 
2. Amenorrhea 
3. Osteoporosis 
The presence of prolonged abnormal eating with subsequent low body fat 
can lead to the development of secondary amenorrhea. Prolonged amenorrhea, 
as defined by the absence of menses for greater than 6 months, can lead to a 
”menopausal-like state” from the low levels of circulating estrogen. As in meno- 
pausal women, this can lead to the development of osteoporosis, even in the 
young, active female athlete.1° 
When evaluating the synchronized swimmer, it is essential to screen for the 
presence of eating disorders as discussed earlier. In addition, it is important to 
elicit a menstrual history to identify the amenorrheic athlete. Upon ruling out 
other causes of amenorrhea, such as pregnancy, primary ovarian dysfunction, 
and hypothalamic dysfunction, the diagnosis of female athlete triad must be 
considered. Evaluation of the athlete’s bone mineral density is essential. 
Treatment of the female athlete triad is complex. The eating disorder re- 
quires serious attention as described above. A sports nutritionist will be helpful 
in ensuring that the nutritional needs of the athlete are met. The use of the birth 
control pill will alleviate the hypo-estrogenic state.l0 The osteoporosis can be 
treated by a combination of reversal of the cause, the use of hormones (i.e., birth 
control pill), dietary supplementation of calcium, magnesium and Vitamin D, 
weight-bearing exercise, and if necessary, the use of biophosphonates such as 
etidronate or alendronate. Ongoing psychologic support is essential in the treat- 
ment of the female athlete triad.15, l6 
Iron Deficiency Anemia 
Synchronized swimmers, like other female athletes in this age group, are 
prone to the development of iron deficiency anemia. The causes of iron defi- 
THE BASICS OF SYNCHRONIZED SWIMMING AND ITS INJURIES 335 
Table 4. POTENTIAL CAUSES FOR LOW SERUM FERRlTlN 
IN YOUNG FEMALE ATHLETES 
Poor dietary intake 
Menstrual blood loss 
* Loss of iron through sweat Gastrointestinal bleeding 
Intravascular hemolysis 
Datafrom Nickerson HJ, Holubets MC, Weiler BC: Causes of iron deficiency in adolescent athletes. 
J Pediatr 114657459, 1989. 
ciency are multifactorial. Table 4 is a list of potential origins for low ferritin 
levels in young female athletes. 
In synchronized swimmers, the two main factors in low ferritin levels 
leading to iron deficiency anemia are poor dietary intake and menstrual blood 
loss. Dietary intake is further compromised in the vegetarian athlete and in the 
athlete with an active eating disorder. More careful surveillance of these two 
groups of athletes is necessary. Menstrual blood loss is also a significant means 
of iron loss, and can be treated by iron supplementation and hormonal regulation 
of the menstrual cycle. 
At one time, it was widespread acceptable clinical practice to measure 
serum ferritin levels in elite athletes to predict performance capabilities. A recent 
meta-analysis by Garza et a19 reviewed the current scientific research on the 
effects of serum ferritin levels on physical performance. Conclusions from this 
meta-analysis revealed that ”low serum ferritin in the absence of frank anemia 
is not associated with reduced endurance perf~rmance.”~ There was also “no 
evidence to support iron supplementation for increasing endurance performance 
in athletes who have isolated low ferritin levels but normal hemoglobin  level^."^ 
It is, therefore, valuable to measure serum ferritin in the synchronized 
swimmer for the surveillance of iron deficiency anemia but not as an indepen- 
dent marker of performance capability that once was accepted common clinical 
practice? 
Otitis Externa and Dermatitis 
In addition to the medical problems listed above, the synchronized swimmer 
also is prone to the development of otitis externa from prolonged water submer- 
sion. This can be prevented by the use of ear drops (one quarter part vinegar 
with three-quarter parts water) used prophylactically after in-water training. 
Symptomatic otitis externa is treated with analgesia and antibiotidanti-inflam- 
matory drops as required. 
Dermatitis is a common finding also due to prolonged exposure to chlorine, 
water, and other pool chemicals. Showering after training is an effective preven- 
tative maneuver. In the acute dermatitis, the use of topical corticosteroid can be 
effective, although caution regarding drug doping is required. 
SUMMARY 
Synchronized swimming is a complex, physically demanding sport. It is a 
challenging and interesting sport for the sports medicine clinician. There is 
opportunity for involvement in program development and in the treatment of 
medical illness and injury. There is also great potential for clinical research in 
336 MOUNTJOY 
synchronized swimming because of the paucity of published literature. Greater 
understanding of the competitive structure, training requirements, and common 
medical presentations facilitate the management of synchronized swimmers. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
I would like to thank Dr. Kevin Samson, Dr. David Magee, and Synchro Canada for 
their assistance and contributions to this chapter. 
References 
1. American Psychiatric Association: Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disor- 
2. Andrews JR, Wilk KL The Athlete’s Shoulder. New York, Churchill Livingstone, 1994 
3. Clark L: Synchronized Swimming. 60 Years to Celebrate. Canadian Amateur Synchro- 
nized Swimming Association, 1985, p 8 
4. Curwin S Tendon injuries: Pathophysiology and treatment. In Zachazewski J, Magee 
D, Quillen W (eds): Athletic Injuries and Rehabilitation. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 
5. Cutbill J, Ladly K, Bray R, et al: Anterior knee pain: A review. Clinical Journal of 
Sports Medicine 740-45, 1997 
6. Davies BN, Donaldson GC, Joels N Do the competition rules of synchronized swim- 
ming encourage undesirable levels of hypoxia? Br J Sports Med 29:16-19, 1995 
7. Duke P, Wallace WA. Pathophysiology of impingement. In Copeland S (ed): Shoulder 
Surgery. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1994 
8. Dyrek D, Micheli L, Magee D: Injuries to the thoracolumbar spine and pelvis. In 
Zachazewski J, Magee D, Quillen W (eds): Athletic Injuries and Rehabilitation. Phila- 
delphia, WB Saunders, 1996, pp 465-485 
9. Garza D, Shrier I, Kohl H, et al: The clinical value of serum ferritin tests in endurance 
athletes. Clinical Journal of Sport Medicine 74653,1997 
10. Haberland C, Seddick D, Marcus R, et al: A physicians survey of therapy for exercise- 
associated amenorrhea: A brief report. Clinical Journal of Sport Medicine 5:246-250, 
1995 
11. Karlson J, Thomee R, Sward L Eleven year follow-up of patello-femoral pain syn- 
drome. Clinical Journal of Sport Medicine 6:22-26, 1996 
12. Magee D, Reid D: Shoulder injuries. In Zachazewski J, Magee D, Quillen W (eds): 
Athletic Injuries and Rehabilitation. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1996, pp 529-530 
13. Nickerson HJ, Holubets MC, Weiler BC: Causes of iron deficiency in adolescent 
athletes. J Pediatr 114657459, 1989 
14. Reid D: Shoulder region. In Sports Injury Assessment and Rehabilitation. New York, 
Churchill Livingstone, 1992, pp 934-936 
15. Ridout R, Hawker G: Ten frequently asked questions about osteoporosis. The Canadian 
Journal of DIAGNOSIS 1470-83, 1997 
16. Rubin L, Lindsay R, Marcus R, et a1 Osteoporosis: What’s new in prevention and 
treatment? Patient Care Canada 8:36-56, 1997 
17. Weinberg S Medical aspects of synchronized swimming. Clinics in Sports Medicine 
18. Werner G (ed): FINA Handbook 1998-2000, pp 276-280 
19. Zemek MJ, Magee D Comparison of glenohumeral joint laxity in elite and recreational 
Address reprint requests to 
Margo Mountjoy MD, CCFP, Dip Sport Med. 
University of Guelph Sports Medicine Clinic 
570 Kortright Road West 
Guelph, Ontario 
Canada N1G 3W8 ders, ed 4, Washington, DC, DSM-IV, 1994, pp 543-544 
1996, pp 27-55 
5159-167,1986 
swimmers. Clinical Journal of Sport Medicine 640-47, 1996 
View publication stats
