See discussions, st ats, and author pr ofiles f or this public ation at : https://www .researchgate.ne t/public ation/26799744
Inju ries and Medical Issues in Synchronized Olympic Sports
Article    in  Current Sports Medicine R eports  · Sept ember 2009
DOI: 10.1249/ JSR.0b013e3181b84a09  · Sour ce: PubMed
CITATIONS
39READS
6,774
1 author:
Mar go Mountjo y
McMast er Univ ersity
222 PUBLICA TIONS    14,962  CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
All c ontent f ollo wing this p age was uplo aded b y Mar go Mountjo y on 24 Januar y 2018.
The user has r equest ed enhanc ement of the do wnlo aded file.
[Section Articles]Current Sports Medicine Reports 
Issue: Volume 8(5), September/October 2009, pp 255-261
Copyright: © 2009 American College of Sports Medicine
Publication Type: [Section Articles]
DOI: 10.1249/JSR.0b013e3181b84a09
ISSN: 1537-890X
Accession: 00149619-200909000-00011
Hide Cover
Injuries and Medical Issues in  Synchronized Olympic Sports 
Mountjoy, Margo 
Author Information 
International Olympic Committee Medical Commission, FINA Sports  Medicine Commission, National Team 
Physician - Synchro Canada, University of Guelph, Ontario, Cana da 
Address for correspondence: Margo Mountjoy, M.D., CCFP, FCFP, D IP Sport Med., Health & Performance 
Centre, University of Guelph, 570 Kortright Road West, Guelph, Ontario, Canada N1G 3W8 (E-mail: 
mmsportdoc@aol.com). 
Abstract 
Spectators of the Olympic Games can enjoy a wide variety of spo rts, including strength, team, timed, 
endurance, and artistic sports. In the Olympic program, there a re two synchronized events: 
synchronized diving and synchronized swimming. The precision of  the synchronization of the athlete's 
movements and skills is an added feature of entertainment. Sync hronized athletes have additional 
training requirements to perfect the synchronization of their s kills. The physical demands on the athlete 
from the repetition of training required for the perfection of synchronization result in injuries unique to 
these sports. Although both traumatic and overuse injuries occu r, overuse injuries are more common. 
As these disciplines are artistic, judged sports, these athlete s also are susceptible to eating disorders 
and the female athlete triad. This article reviews the training  regimen of these athletes and outlines the 
injuries and health concerns that are common in the synchronize d sports. 
INTRODUCTION 
The perfection of synchronization requires endless hours of rep etition. In addition to the training required 
for the acquisition of sport-specific skills, synchronized athl etes require additional training to perfect the 
precision of their movements. In most synchronized events, the athletes must synchronize their movements 
to each other. In the solo event of synchronized swimming, athl etes synchronize their movements to the 
rhythm, mood, and intensity of the music. Attention to the pres ervation and promotion of health in these 
athletes maximizes performance. Knowledge of the common injurie s of the synchronized athlete enables 
the team physician to develop strategies to prevent injury and thus minimize time lost from training. Early 
identification of and appropriate intervention for medical issu es is essential for the well-being of the 
synchronized athlete. Page 1 of 2 7 Ovid: Injuries and Medical Issu es in Synchronized Olympic Sport s.
2018-01-2 3 http://ovidsp.tx.ovid.com.lib access.lib.mcmaster.ca/s p-3.27.2b/ovidweb.cg i
SYNCHRONIZED SWIMMING 
Synchronized swimming is a unique aquatic sport that combines e ndurance, flexibility, strength, power, 
acrobatic skill, and performance  skills. Synchronized swimming became a sport in the Olympic program in 
Los Angeles in 1984 with the inclusion of the solo and duet eve nt. In 2000 at the Sydney Olympic Games, 
the team event was added, and the solo was eliminated. In addit ion to the Olympic program, synchronized 
swimmers compete in World and C ontinental Championships. The ru les of synchronized swimming are 
governed by the international federation FINA (Federation Inter nationale Natation Association). Both duet 
and team events have two competitions: technical and free routi ne. The technical routine comprises 6-10 
required elements or set movements in a predetermined order. Th e mandatory technical elements illustrate 
the athlete's flexibility, strength, skill, power, and control.  The free routine is long er in duration and has no 
predetermined elements, thereby allowing athletes to express th eir interpretation of the music and their 
skill. The international rules f or synchronized swimming do not  allow men to compete in synchronized 
swimming, although male involvement is beginning in specific ge ographic regions of the world at a 
development level ( 5). 
TRAINING REQUIREMENTS 
The elite synchronized swimmer requires extensive foundational training to be able to meet the 
physiological demands of stamina, speed, and strength necessary  to perform complex routines. As such, 
synchronized swimmers need to engage in a well-designed and bal anced training program that includes 
cardiovascular fitness, strength, and flexibility, in addition to the choreography and technical training 
required for the sport. In the formative years, more time is de voted to the foundation areas and less to the 
specific techniques of the sport. Although the elite athlete re quires less foundational training during the 
competitive season, a certain amount is required to maintain ge neral fitness, to improve power and speed, 
and to prevent injury ( 3). 
The typical elite synchronized swimmer trains in the water for 8-10 sessions·wk-1. Each training session is 
2-4 h in duration. In addition, they cross-train on land for 4- 6 sessions·wk-1, each session lasting 45-90 min 
in duration. The training pattern is high-volume and high-inten sity, averaging approximately 40 h·wk-1. The 
training program is designed to balance the following component s: fitness building, the acquisition of sport-
specific skills, routine development, routine perfection, and r ecovery. The skills required in synchronized 
swimming are comprehensive, including flexibility, aerobic and anaerobic endurance, core strength, power, 
acrobatics, strength endurance, choreography skills, and artist ic expression ( 3). 
INJURIES IN SYNCHRONIZED SWIMMING 
The International Olympic Committee completed an injury prevale nce study during the 2008 Beijing 
Olympic Games. This study identified all new onset injuries tha t occurred in competition and in training 
during the time period of the Olympic Games. Results from this study show that synchronized swimming 
was one of the safest sports, with no in-competition injuries i ncurred and no time-loss from training or 
competition. The injury incidence for synchronized swimming was  1.9% in comparison with the overall 
injury incidence for all athletes at the Olympic Games of 9.6% (8). Page 2 of 2 7 Ovid: Injuries and Medical Issu es in Synchronized Olympic Sport s.
2018-01-2 3 http://ovidsp.tx.ovid.com.lib access.lib.mcmaster.ca/s p-3.27.2b/ovidweb.cg i
One of the limitations of this study is that it did not identif y chronic overuse injuries. Although there are no 
published epidemiological studies on injury incidence in synchr onized swimming outside of the Olympic 
Games 2008, clinical experience from consultation with team phy sicians of elite synchronized swimmers 
over the past 20 yr suggests that these athletes are at particu lar risk for chronic overuse injuries as well as 
acute traumatic injuries. Prevalence data on chronic overuse in juries in synchronized swimming were 
obtained during the 13th FINA World Aquatic Championships in 2009 and is pending analys is and 
publication. 
Acute Traumatic Injuries 
Emphasis in recent years in synchronized swimming has been on t he development of high-risk acrobatic 
moves, especially in the team routine. On several occasions dur ing the routine, one or more athletes is 
raised above the water and thrown by the remaining team members . The airborne athlete completes a 
series of artistic acrobatic moves while on the stack or while in the air. This is known in the sport as a 
"highlight." The routine is rewarded by the judges if the highl ight is high-risk, artistically unique, and 
executed with skill. The airborne athlete is at risk for trauma tic injury from contact with another swimmer, 
the water, or the pool deck. To accomplish this maneuver, the r emaining athletes must "stack" underwater 
in close proximity and synchronize their propulsion at maximum force and speed to propel the airborne 
athlete. As a result, the athletes in the stack are also at ris k for the traumatic injuries. Athletes train for 
these skills on dry land on mats, and injuries can occur during  training if appropriate safety precautions are 
not followed. This new trend in synchronized swimming has resul ted in a change in the injury pattern. Acute 
injuries, including concussion, acute hematoma, contusions, spr ains/strains, disc herniation, fractures, and 
tympanic membrane perforation are more common than they were in  previous years ( 11,14 ). 
Acute tears of muscle and tendons occur with the increase in hi gh-speed, ballistic movements. The 
"Rocket" (a quick vertical thrust followed by an explosive move  to the split position) is responsible for acute 
groin, hamstring, and/or quadriceps strains ( 11,14,24 ). 
Although a review of the treatment of acute injuries is beyond the scope of this article, it is important that 
the team physician be familiar with the most recent guidelines for treating concussion ( 10). Because of the 
high training load and hard work ethic of synchronized swimmers , compliance with the necessary rest for 
recovery from concussion is often challenging for the coach and  the athlete. Education and close follow-up 
are required with this population. 
Chronic Overuse injuries 
Although the prevalence of overuse injuries is not documented i n the scientific literature, they are common 
in my clinical practice as a national synchronized swimming tea m physician for 22 yr. There are three body 
regions that most commonly are affected in synchronized swimmin g: the shoulder, the lumbar spine, and 
the knee. 
Shoulder Page 3 of 2 7 Ovid: Injuries and Medical Issu es in Synchronized Olympic Sport s.
2018-01-2 3 http://ovidsp.tx.ovid.com.lib access.lib.mcmaster.ca/s p-3.27.2b/ovidweb.cg i
The synchronized swimmer trains for cardiovascular fitness by s wimming freestyle. In addition to this 
training, she also does repetitive skills such as arm actions i n routines, sculling, and dry-land drill, which is 
the on-land rehearsal of the routine. These activities occur re petitively for several hours on a daily basis. All 
of these repetitive actions over time may result in micro-traum a to the rotator cuff, in particular to the 
supraspinatus, and sometimes to the long head of the biceps. An other mechanism may be impingement of 
inflamed soft tissue structures, such as the subacromial bursa within the anatomical constraints of the 
subacromial space. Treatment of this injury requires an underst anding of the demands on the shoulder in 
synchronized swimming. To ensure adequate rest of the shoulder,  it is essential that the athlete is limited 
not only from performing freestyle, but also from the other act ivities that place the shoulder in the 
vulnerable position of impingement ( 14). 
Lumbar spine Page 4 of 2 7 Ovid: Injuries and Medical Issu es in Synchronized Olympic Sport s.
2018-01-2 3 http://ovidsp.tx.ovid.com.lib access.lib.mcmaster.ca/s p-3.27.2b/ovidweb.cg i
Another recent trend in the evolution of synchronized swimming is the emergence of fast, repetitive 
movements that inflict new mechanical stresses on the back and spine. The result of this new style is the 
emergence of an increase in the prevalence of lumbar dysfunctio n from the repetitive and rapid arching. A 
unique move in synchronized swimming that adds further stress o n the lumbar spine is the Rocket move, 
where the swimmer thrusts high out of the water in the vertical  position, followed by a rapid move to the 
splits position at the peak of the vertical. Another move that renders the lumbar spine vulnerable to injury is 
the walkout, which requires significant lumbar hyperextension ( Fig. 1 ). The "knight" position, where the 
athlete is in the vertical position with one leg on the surface  behind the athlete, also places stress on the 
lumbar spine by forcing lumbar hyperextension ( Fig. 1 ) (5). Training errors can be blamed for the 
development of lumbar dysfunction and should be taken into cons ideration when evaluating the athlete for 
the cause of the injury and when developing the treatment plan.  These errors include excessive repetitions, 
explosive speeds, arching with a rotational component, excessiv e overarching, inadequate neuromuscular 
training, poor core stability and posture, inadequate flexibili ty, and premature progression to higher-risk 
skills. 
Figure 1. Synchronized swimming positions causing lumbar strain . (Reprinted from the FINA Handvook 2005-2009. 
pp. 2048-2050. Used with permission.) 
Facet dysfunction, myofascial injury, spondylolysis, spondyloli sthesis, and acute disc protrusion are some 
of the lumbar injuries seen in synchronized swimming. A thoroug h physical examination and appropriate 
imaging studies as indicated are necessary to ensure the accura te diagnosis and subsequent treatment 
plan. These pathologies may occur in isolation or together ( 14). Page 5 of 2 7 Ovid: Injuries and Medical Issu es in Synchronized Olympic Sport s.
2018-01-2 3 http://ovidsp.tx.ovid.com.lib access.lib.mcmaster.ca/s p-3.27.2b/ovidweb.cg i
Facet dysfunction and myofascial injuries usually resolve with physiotherapy and training modifications. In 
my clinical experience, spondylolysis and spondylolisthesis are  more serious and often are career-ending 
for the synchronized swimmer. The athlete with acute disc protr usion should be monitored for signs of 
acute spinal cord compression. 
Knee 
Like the breaststroker and the water polo player, the synchroni zed swimmer is vulnerable to chronic 
overuse injury of the knee. This can be attributed to the egg-b eater kick that is used by the synchronized 
swimmer to maintain herself at the surface of the water while h er arms are moving in the air. As this kick is 
one of the most important moves in synchronized swimming, the s ynchronized swimmer trains this kick for 
long durations at high-intensity levels. Progressively difficul t egg-beater drills are used as foundation 
training for the development of strength and skill. 
The synchronized swimmer may present with either medial or ante rior joint pain. The medial joint pain is 
caused by the valgus positioning of the knee during the egg-bea ter kick. Anterior joint pain is attributed to 
abnormal tracking of the patella in the trochlear notch of the femur. Patellar hypermobility, combined with 
weakness of the vastus medialis oblique, results in poor patell ar tracking, especially in the athlete with 
biomechanical abnormalities of the feet. As such, dry-land trai ning in addition to the egg-beater kick can 
exacerbate knee pain in the synchronized swimmer. The athlete w ill complain of stiffness after rest and 
anterior knee pain while kneeling and using the stairs. It may be aggravated by the egg-beater kick at later 
stages. Medial joint pain can be caused by medial collateral li gament strain or inflammation of the pes 
anserine bursa. Rarely, the medial meniscus is implicated. This  athlete often presents with joint locking, 
joint effusion, and acute pain. All of these pathologies can be  managed with nonsurgical interventions, with 
the exception of medial meniscal tears. Alteration to the durat ion and intensity of the egg-beater kick during 
training is necessary. Cross-training on the bicycle for fitnes s is preferred to running during the 
rehabilitative process as there are fewer biomechanical forces on the knee during cycling than while 
running ( 11,14 ). 
SYNCHRONIZED DIVING 
Diving is an aquatic sport with the added element of danger and  risk. Diving requires power, flexibility, and 
strength. Diving began in the 17th century by gymnasts in Germa ny and Sweden who practiced their skills 
in the water for training. Synchronized diving adds the complex  component of synchronization of defined 
movements with precise timing at very high speeds. Although div ing became an Olympic sport in 1904 for 
men and in 1912 for women, synchronized diving recently debuted  at the Sydney Olympic Games in 2000, 
thus allowing the elite solo diver further opportunities to ach ieve success on the international podium. A 
diver may choose to compete in synchronized diving in addition to solo diving if he or she has a suitably 
matched partner available in size and stature as well as skill.  Synchronized diving events include the 3-m 
springboard and the 10-m tower for both men and women. The judg ing in synchronized diving is unique in 
that there are nine judges: five judge the synchronization of t he positions and timing, two judge the 
execution of diver A, and the remaining two judge the execution  of diver B ( 5). 
TRAINING REQUIREMENTS FO R SYNCHRONIZED DIVING Page 6 of 2 7 Ovid: Injuries and Medical Issu es in Synchronized Olympic Sport s.
2018-01-2 3 http://ovidsp.tx.ovid.com.lib access.lib.mcmaster.ca/s p-3.27.2b/ovidweb.cg i
Like synchronized swimmers, divers have extensive foundation tr aining of basic skills to enable them to 
perform the complex moves in elite diving. The diver builds on the foundation skills with sport-specific skills 
of diving before synchronization begins. The elite diver must b e proficient in strength, speed, power, and 
flexibility. Special training of core strength, height velocity , and form also are important. Synchronized 
diving occurs at the elite level once the basics of the sport h ave been accomplished. In the preseason, the 
elite diver spends approximately 65% of total training time on dry-land training. In the precompetitive 
season, the diver splits training time equally between dry-land  and in-water training. Finally, in the 
competitive season, the athlete focuses on maximizing power and  speed, spending approximately 70% of 
training time on the boards. Dry-land training includes the acq uisition of diving-specific skills on the 
trampoline, crash mats, dry board with foam pit, ballet dancing , stall bars (wall bars to train quadriceps and 
core strengthening), and training on overhead belts with spotti ng rigs, if available. Careful planning of the 
training program occurs with respect to volume and intensity to  ensure a balanced training program thus 
preventing injury and burnout ( 7). 
INJURIES IN SYNCHRO NIZED DIVING 
Diving also was one of the safest sports for acute injury incid ence at the 2008 Beijing Olympic Games, with 
no in-competition injuries and no time-loss injuries reported. The overall injury incidence was 2.1%. This 
study, however, did not identify chronic overuse injuries, whic h are more common in the diver ( 8). No data 
exist to compare the incidence of injury in the synchronized di ver relative to the competitive diver, as the 
synchronized diver also may compete in individual events. 
Acute Traumatic Injuries 
Although very uncommon, traumatic injuries in diving from conta ct with the tower, board, or water can be 
catastrophic. From the 10-m tower, the diver can reach speeds o f 63 km·h-1 at the point of entry into the 
water and deceleration forces of 20 G. Landing flat in the wate r also can be serious, resulting in a 
pneumothoraces, fractures of the ribs, retinal detachments, and  perforations of the tympanic ear drum ( 26). 
Chronic Overuse Injuries 
The prevalence of chronic overuse injuries in diving in the sci entific literature ranges from 39% to 100%. 
The risk for injury increases with increasing level of skill an d the higher degree of difficulty of dives. The 
majority of the injuries occur during impact with the water. Th e most common pathological mechanisms 
encountered in diving are muscle strains, ligamental sprains, t endinosis, dislocations, and fractures. 
Anatomically, the most commonly injured body parts include the lumbar spine, shoulder, wrist, hand, and 
head ( 25). 
Lumbar spine 
As the diver enters the water he arches to execute a clean entr y or "rip." This repetitive action at high 
speeds with high deceleration forces places stress on the lumba r spine, resulting in facet joint dysfunction, 
paraspinal muscle strains, and stress fractures of the pars int erarticularis (spondylolysis) ( 18). 
Shoulder 
Any muscular imbalance in the shoulder stabilizers can result i n multidirectional instability and tendinosis 
aggravated by water entry. Shoulder strengthening and muscular balancing is an important preventative 
training strategy. Tower divers in particular are vulnerable to  triceps muscle strains as the triceps is 
required for the slow extension into the handstand starting pos ition of many tower dives ( 25). 
Wrist Page 7 of 2 7 Ovid: Injuries and Medical Issu es in Synchronized Olympic Sport s.
2018-01-2 3 http://ovidsp.tx.ovid.com.lib access.lib.mcmaster.ca/s p-3.27.2b/ovidweb.cg i
The wrist also is a joint that is particularly vulnerable to in jury in the elite diver from water entry. As the diver 
lines up to enter the water, he/she grasps one hand over the ot her tightly clasped (flat hand grab 
technique) to disperse the water, allowing entry of the head an d body. The wrist of the upper hand is the 
one most often injured. A useful technique to enable the injure d athlete to continue diving is to tape the 
wrists to prevent maximal dorsal flexion when hitting the water . The pathologies of the wrist seen in diving 
include carpal ligamental sprai ns, scaphoid-lunate dislocations , triangulofibrocartilage complex tears, wrist 
extensor tendinosis, and growth plate injuries ( 18,26 ). 
INJURY PREVENTION IN S YNCHRONIZED SPORTS 
Emphasis on injury prevention maximizes performance and minimiz es time lost from injury. All physicians 
working with synchronized sports should establish an injury pre vention program to meet this goal. 
According to the injury-prevention model of van Mechelen ( Fig. 2 ), the first step of inj ury prevention is injury 
surveillance ( 21). As evident from the previous discussion, there are minimal d ata in the scientific literature 
on injury prevalence in synchronized swimming. Injury prevalenc e research looking at both acute and 
chronic injuries throughout the training season in elite synchr onized swimmers is recommended. 
Subsequently, injury prevention interventions should be develop ed and evaluated for efficacy. 
Figure 2. Injury prevention mode l - van Mechelen. (Reprinted fr om van Mechelen W, Hlobil H, Kemper HC. 
Incidence, severity, aetiology and prevention of sports injurie s. A review of concepts. Sports Med . 1992; 14:82-99. 
Used with permission.) 
One of the most effective injury prevention tools is the attent ion spent on appropriate training of the 
developing synchronized athlete. Training guidelines based on s cientific evidence have been published by 
an International Olympic Committee (IOC) working group to steer  the athletic training in the elite child 
athlete ( 13). A logical and progressive training program such as Canada's Long Term Athlete Development 
Program should be developed and followed by coaches. This progr am should pay respect to the physical 
and psychological stages of development ( 3,7). 
Other principles of effective injury prevention in synchronized  sports include the provision for adequate rest, 
recovery, adequate nutrition, and psychological support. Page 8 of 2 7 Ovid: Injuries and Medical Issu es in Synchronized Olympic Sport s.
2018-01-2 3 http://ovidsp.tx.ovid.com.lib access.lib.mcmaster.ca/s p-3.27.2b/ovidweb.cg i
A preseason sport-specific preparticipation examination (PPE) s hould be completed in order to evaluate 
modifiable parameters influential in injury prevention. This ev aluation should occur at regular intervals 
throughout the season in addition to the preseason period ( 19). The Table  outlines these parameters. 
TABLE. Synchronized sport-specific, preparticipation examinatio n parameters. 
INJURY TREATMENT PRINCIPL ES IN SYNCHRONIZED SPORTS 
Treatment of injuries in synchronized sports follows the same p rinciples of treating injuries for other 
athletes: early detection, thorough medical evaluation, appropr iate therapy, cross-training to allow for 
maintenance of fitness while recuperating, psychological suppor t, and gradual, progressive reintegration to 
sport. 
When working with the elite synchronized swimmer, it also is im portant to consider the implications of the 
synchronized component of their sport. Removing a synchronized swimmer from training has a greater 
impact on that athlete's career than removing an individual ath lete such as a long distance runner. The 
runner may continue to cross-train;  however, the synchronized a thlete is unable to practice an essential 
element of the sport. The athlete should be allowed to remain p ool-side during training sessions and to be 
reintegrated back to full training as soon as is feasible. 
MEDICAL ISSUES IN SY NCHRONIZED SPORTS 
Female Athlete Triad (Triad) Page 9 of 2 7 Ovid: Injuries and Medical Issu es in Synchronized Olympic Sport s.
2018-01-2 3 http://ovidsp.tx.ovid.com.lib access.lib.mcmaster.ca/s p-3.27.2b/ovidweb.cg i
The Triad is a clinical syndrome that describes the interrelati onship between energy availability, menstrual 
function, and bone mineral density. Energy availability is defi ned as energy intake minus energy 
expenditure. An athlete runs into difficulty when her energy ou tput exceeds energy intake, resulting in an 
overall energy deficit. This can occur as a result of disordere d eating or as a result of inadequate intake of 
nutrition to meet disproportionate energy output. One physiolog ical result of the energy deficit is menstrual 
dysfunction, ranging in a spectrum from eumenorrhea to amenorrh ea (15). Another consequence to the 
energy deficit is altered bone health ( 20). This can range from optimal bone health to osteoporosis ( Fig. 3 ). 
In athletes, the first presentation of unhealthy bone density i s often a stress fracture ( 2,9). This is rare in 
synchronized swimming as there is less loading stress on the bo nes in the training of synchronized 
swimmers relative to divers. The prevalence of the Triad in syn chronized swimming and in diving is 
unknown; however, it is well established that disordered eating , eating disorders, and amenorrhea occur 
more frequently in sports that emphasize leanness ( 15). 
Figure 3. Model of the female athlete triad. "Female athlete tr iad. The spectrums of energy availability, menstrual 
function, and bone mineral density along which female athletes are distributed ( narrow arrows ). An athelete's 
condition moves along each spectrum at a different rate, in one  direction or the other, according to her diet and 
exercise habits. Energy availability, defined as dietary energy  intake minus exercise energy expenditure, affects 
bone mineral density both directly via metabolic hormones and i ndirectly via effects on menstrual function and 
thereby estrogen ( thick arrows )." (Adapted from Nattiv A, Loucks A, Manore M, et al. American College of Sports 
Medicine position stand: the female athlete triad. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc.  2007; 39:1867-82.) 
Eating Disorders Page 10 of 2 7 Ovid: Injuries and Medical Issu es in Synchronized Olympic Sport s.
2018-01-2 3 http://ovidsp.tx.ovid.com.lib access.lib.mcmaster.ca/s p-3.27.2b/ovidweb.cg i
Due to the aesthetic judged nature of synchronized sports, ther e is a pressure for these athletes to be thin. 
In some cases, this may lead to disordered eating or a clinical  eating disorder. An eating disorder is a 
psychiatric diagnosis characterized by a disturbance in eating behaviours. There are two types of eating 
disorders: anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa. Anorexia nervo sa is characterized by marked restriction 
of eating with a 15% weight loss from expected norm. Despite th is, the athlete feels overweight and has a 
fear of gaining weight. Bulimia nervosa is characterized by rep etitive cycles of binging - eating followed by 
purging. They are usually of normal weight. Diagnostic criteria  for these disorders can be found in the 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition (DSM-IV)  (1). Disordered eating 
occurs when there are abnormal eating behaviors that are not se vere enough to meet the diagnostic 
criteria for an eating disorder. In the literature, the prevale nce of eating disorders in aesthetic sports that 
emphasize leanness ranges between 25% and 31%, in comparison to  5% in the general population ( 1). 
The psychological consequences of eating disorders include depr ession, anxiety, and low self-esteem and 
suicide. Physical sequelae of eating disorders affect all body systems. There is a sixfold mortality rate and 
a high suicide rate. Prognosis for long-term recovery from eati ng disorders is guarded. This health issue is 
a serious problem for athletes in aesthetic sports and in parti cular for synchronized sports. The IOC 
Medical Commission is currently working with the International Federations to look at strategies to reduce 
the pressure for thinness and thereby reduce the risk of the de velopment of eating disorders ( 12). 
Asthma 
The prevalence of asthma in synchronized swimming at the 2008 B eijing Olympic Games was the second 
highest of all sports, at 21.2% after triathlon which was 25.7% . Diving, in contrast, was ranked 12th of the 
Olympic sports at 4.9%. The overall incidence of asthma for all  sports was 7.2% ( 6). 
Postulation on the cause of this high incidence of asthma in sy nchronized swimming as an endurance 
discipline suggests that this may be the result of chronic expo sure of the lungs to environmental allergens 
while breathing rapidly and deeply during endurance training. T he exposure of the lungs to irritant 
chloramines, byproducts of chlorine, is considered to be a majo r factor. Partial reversibility of these findings 
appears to occur upon retirement from elite sport. More researc h is required to determine a strategy to 
minimize or reduce the adverse effects of training on airways ( 6). Treatment of the asthmatic synchronized 
swimmer should follow the same general treatment principles of asthma treatment for all individuals: twice 
$aily dosing with inhaled glucocorticosteroids with the periodi c use of [beta]2 agonists to reverse 
bronchospasm as needed. 
The treatment of asthma is restricted by the conditions of the World Anti-Doping Association, and attention 
to these requirements is essential to avoid an antidoping rule violation ( 22,23 ). 
Hypoxia 
Hypoxia has been demonstrated in synchronized swimming, resulti ng in central cyanosis and confusion 
following a free team routine in a study completed in Great Bri tain in the early 1990s. At this time, the 
emphasis in synchronized swimming routines was on prolonged bre ath-holding. The style in synchronized 
swimming has evolved to a more acrobatic style with emphasis on  execution and less emphasis on breath-
holding. Although syncope from hypoxia is now rare, research is  required to define more clearly the 
physiological adaptation of the synchronized swimmer ( 4). 
Iron Deficiency Page 11 of 2 7 Ovid: Injuries and Medical Issu es in Synchronized Olympic Sport s.
2018-01-2 3 http://ovidsp.tx.ovid.com.lib access.lib.mcmaster.ca/s p-3.27.2b/ovidweb.cg i
Iron deficiency is commonly seen in female athletes. The causes  of this are multifactoral, including 
menstrual losses, hemolysis, gastrointestinal losses, hematuria , and sweating ( 16). Recent evidence 
postulates that the acute-phase response of exercise results in  a release of cytokines that stimulates the 
production of the hepatic hormone hepcidin,`which has a negativ e impact on iron transport in the body. 
Hepcidin functions as one of the key regulators of erythropoesi s in the liver. More research is required to 
better define the physiological mechanisms involved in iron def iciency in the female athlete. Although this is 
not unique to the synchronized athlete, attention to iron level s is essential when caring for this population 
(16). 
Antidoping 
Doping is not a common feature in synchronized sports. The hist ory of adverse analytical findings in 
synchronized sports reveals that the majority of cases, althoug h rare in numbers, are inadvertent doping 
rather than flagrant attempts at cheating ( 17). When caring for the elite synchronized athlete, the team 
physician must have a clear understanding of the rules and regu lations that govern the field of sport as 
outlined by the World Anti-Doping Association ( 22,23 ). 
CONCLUSION 
Synchronized swimming and synchronized diving are popular and e ntertaining aquatic sports at the 
Olympic Games. The added element of synchronization of timing, position, and athletic skills enhances the 
interest, entertainment value, and difficulty. The synchronized  athlete requires extra training in addition to 
the individual athlete to perfect these skills, which results i n a greater vulnerability to injury. Although acute 
traumatic injuries occur, chronic overuse injuries are more com mon. In addition to injuries, the 
synchronized athlete also is at risk for certain medical condit ions. Knowledge of these health risks, effective 
early interventions, and attention to preventative measures is imperative for the team physician. Successful 
injury and illness prevention programs will result in health pr eservation, prolonged retention in sport, 
prevention of time-loss from sport, and performance enhancement . 
References 
1. American Psychiatric Association Task Force on DSM-IV. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders: DSMIV-TR, 4th ed . Washington (DC): American Psychiatric Association, 2000; p. 5 38-95. 
[Context Link]
2. Barrack M, Rauh M, Nichols J. Prevalence of and traits assoc iated with low BMD among female 
adolescent runners. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc . 2008; 40:2015-21. [Context Link]
3. Croxon S. Long term athlete development matrix. Synchro. Can.  2006; 21-3. [Context Link]
4. Davies B, Donaldson GC, Joels N. Do the competition rules of  synchronized swimming encourage 
undesirable levels of hypoxia? Br. J. Sport Med . 1995; 29:17-8. [Context Link]
5. FINA Handbook . 2005-2009; p. 170, 248-50. [Context Link]
6. Fitch KD, Sue-Chu M, Anderson S, et al. Asthma and the elite athlete: summary of the International 
Olympic Committee's consensus conference, Lausanne, Switzerland , January 22-24, 2008. J. Allergy Clin. 
Immunol . 2008; 122:254-60. [Context Link]
7. Geller M. Diving Canada long-term athlete development model.  Dive Can . 2007; 6-8. [Context Link]Page 1 2of 27 Ovid: Injuries and Medical Issu es in Synchronized Olympic Sport s.
2018-01-2 3 http://ovidsp.tx.ovid.com.lib access.lib.mcmaster.ca/s p-3.27.2b/ovidweb.cg i
8. Junge A, Engebretsen L, Mountjoy M, et al. Sports injuries during the Summer Olympic Games 2008. 
Am. J. Sports Med . 2009 (in press). [Context Link]
9. Liu S, Lebrun C. Effect of oral contraceptives and hormone r eplacement therapy on bone mineral density 
in premenopausal and perimenopausal women: a systematic review.  Br. J. Sport Med . 2006; 40:11-24. 
[Context Link]
10. McCrory P, Meeuwisse W, Johnston K, et al. Zurich consensus statement on concussion in sport. Clin. 
J. Sport Med . 2009; 19:185-200. [Context Link]
11. Mountjoy M. The basics in synchronized swimming and its inj uries. Clin. Sport Med . 1999; 18:321-36. 
[Context Link]
12. Mountjoy M. Weight control strategies of Olympic athletes s triving for leanness: what can be done to 
make sport a safer environment? Clin. J. Sport Med . 2008; 17:2-4. [Context Link]
13. Mountjoy M, Armstrong N, Bizzini L, et al. IOC consensus statement: training the elite child athlete. Br. 
J. Sport Med . 2008; 42:163-4 and Clin. J. Sport Med . 2008; 18:122-3. [Context Link]
14. Mountjoy M, Gerrard D. Prese rving and promoting health in t he aquatic athlete. In: Seifert L, Chollet D, 
Mujika I, editors. Hauppauge (NY): Nova Science Publishers (in press). [Context Link]
15. Nattiv A, Loucks A, Manore M, et al. American College of Sports Medicine position stand: the femal e 
athlete triad. Med. Sci. Sport Exerc . 2007; 39:1867-82. [Context Link]
16. Peeling P, Dawson B, Goodman C, Landers G, Trinder D. Athle tic induced iron deficiency: new insights 
into the role of inflammation, cytokines and hormones. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol . 2008; 103:381-91. [Context 
Link]
17. Pipe A, Corrigan B, Mountjoy M. The use of medications, sup plements and ergogenic aids by elite 
competitors at the 2003 World FINA Swim Championships. Clin. J. Sport Med . 2005; 15:394. [Context Link]
18. Rubin B, Anderson S. Diving. In: Caine D, Caine C, Lindner K, editors. Epidemiology of Sports Injuries . 
Champaign (IL): Human Kinetics, 1996; p. 176-85. [Context Link]
19. Rumball J, Lebrun C. Preparticipation physical examination:  selected issues for the female athlete. Clin. 
J. Sport Med . 2004; 14:153-60. [Context Link]
20. Torstveit MK, Sundgot-Borgen J. Bone mineral density in ath letes. BJSM . 2005; 39:282-11. [Context 
Link]
21. van Mechelen W, Hlobil H, Kem per HC. Incidence, severity, a etiology and prevention of sports injuries. 
A review of concepts. Sports Med . 1992; 14:82-99. [Context Link]
22. WADA Prohibited List I nternational Standard 2009. [Context Link]
23. WADA Therapeutic Use Exemp tion International Standard 2009.  [Context Link]Page 1 3of 27 Ovid: Injuries and Medical Issu es in Synchronized Olympic Sport s.
2018-01-2 3 http://ovidsp.tx.ovid.com.lib access.lib.mcmaster.ca/s p-3.27.2b/ovidweb.cg i
Select All 
 Export Selected to PowerPoin t24. Weinberg S. Medical aspects of synchronized swimming. Clin. Sport Med . 1986; 5:159. [Context Link]
25. Wingfield K. Injury incidence in elite Canadian divers. Clin. J. Sport Med . 2004; 14:381. [Context Link]
26. Zimmerman W. Medical aspects of competitive diving. FINA World Aquatics Magazine . 2007; 59:28-30. 
[Context Link]
IMAGE GALLERY 
 Figure 1
 Figure 2
 TABLE. Synchronized ...
 Figure 3
Back to Top
About Us Contact Us Terms of Use © 2017 Ovid Technologies, Inc.  All rights reserved.
OvidSP_UI03.27.02.119, SourceID 109790Page 1 4of 27 Ovid: Injuries and Medical Issu es in Synchronized Olympic Sport s.
2018-01-2 3 http://ovidsp.tx.ovid.com.lib access.lib.mcmaster.ca/s p-3.27.2b/ovidweb.cg i
Page 1 5of 27 Ovid: Injuries and Medical Issu es in Synchronized Olympic Sport s.
2018-01-2 3 http://ovidsp.tx.ovid.com.lib access.lib.mcmaster.ca/s p-3.27.2b/ovidweb.cg i
Page 1 6of 27 Ovid: Injuries and Medical Issu es in Synchronized Olympic Sport s.
2018-01-2 3 http://ovidsp.tx.ovid.com.lib access.lib.mcmaster.ca/s p-3.27.2b/ovidweb.cg i
Page 1 7of 27 Ovid: Injuries and Medical Issu es in Synchronized Olympic Sport s.
2018-01-2 3 http://ovidsp.tx.ovid.com.lib access.lib.mcmaster.ca/s p-3.27.2b/ovidweb.cg i
Page 18 of 2 7 Ovid: Injuries and Medical Issu es in Synchronized Olympic Sport s.
2018-01-2 3 http://ovidsp.tx.ovid.com.lib access.lib.mcmaster.ca/s p-3.27.2b/ovidweb.cg i
Page 1 9of 27 Ovid: Injuries and Medical Issu es in Synchronized Olympic Sport s.
2018-01-2 3 http://ovidsp.tx.ovid.com.lib access.lib.mcmaster.ca/s p-3.27.2b/ovidweb.cg i
Page 20 of 2 7 Ovid: Injuries and Medical Issu es in Synchronized Olympic Sport s.
2018-01-2 3 http://ovidsp.tx.ovid.com.lib access.lib.mcmaster.ca/s p-3.27.2b/ovidweb.cg i
Page 21 of 2 7 Ovid: Injuries and Medical Issu es in Synchronized Olympic Sport s.
2018-01-2 3 http://ovidsp.tx.ovid.com.lib access.lib.mcmaster.ca/s p-3.27.2b/ovidweb.cg i
Page 2 2of 27 Ovid: Injuries and Medical Issu es in Synchronized Olympic Sport s.
2018-01-2 3 http://ovidsp.tx.ovid.com.lib access.lib.mcmaster.ca/s p-3.27.2b/ovidweb.cg i
Page 2 3of 27 Ovid: Injuries and Medical Issu es in Synchronized Olympic Sport s.
2018-01-2 3 http://ovidsp.tx.ovid.com.lib access.lib.mcmaster.ca/s p-3.27.2b/ovidweb.cg i
Page 2 4of 27 Ovid: Injuries and Medical Issu es in Synchronized Olympic Sport s.
2018-01-2 3 http://ovidsp.tx.ovid.com.lib access.lib.mcmaster.ca/s p-3.27.2b/ovidweb.cg i
Page 2 5of 27 Ovid: Injuries and Medical Issu es in Synchronized Olympic Sport s.
2018-01-2 3 http://ovidsp.tx.ovid.com.lib access.lib.mcmaster.ca/s p-3.27.2b/ovidweb.cg i
Page 2 6of 27 Ovid: Injuries and Medical Issu es in Synchronized Olympic Sport s.
2018-01-2 3 http://ovidsp.tx.ovid.com.lib access.lib.mcmaster.ca/s p-3.27.2b/ovidweb.cg i
Page 2 7of 27 Ovid: Injuries and Medical Issu es in Synchronized Olympic Sport s.
2018-01-2 3 http://ovidsp.tx.ovid.com.lib access.lib.mcmaster.ca/s p-3.27.2b/ovidweb.cg iView publication stats
