"Экономика и социум" № 2(105) 2023                        www.iupr.ru  352 
 Soliyev I.M.  
assistant  
Kosimov I.U.  
assistant  
Sodikov S.A.  
assistant  
Department of Rehabilitation, Sports Medicine,  
Folk Medicine and Physical Culture  
ASMI  
 
NEUROREHABILITATION OF MINOR INJURIES OF THE 
LUMBOSACRAL SPINE DEPARTMENT IN ATHLETES WITH THE 
USE OF APPLI ED TRAINING SWIMMING FOR STRETCHING  
 
Annotation. The most frequent injuries of the musculoskeletal system in 
athletes are so -called minor injuries: minor concussions, bruises, compressions, 
sprains, chronic microtrauma, degenerative dystrophic processes, e tc. Most of 
these injuries are minor sports injuries or manifestations of overtraining that do 
not require specialized diagnosis and treatment. Minor injuries of the 
lumbosacral spine require special attention, since in the absence of adequate 
treatment th ey can lead to serious health problems for an athlete. The leading 
means of neurorehabilitation of minor injuries of the lumbosacral spine in 
athletes are traction therapy and physical therapy (exercise therapy).  
Keywords: musculoskeletal system, minor inj uries, bruising, compression, 
sprains, chronic microtrauma, degenerative dystrophic processes. athletes, 
physical therapy.  
 
The purpose  of this study is to test the method of applied training 
swimming for stretching as a complex method of neurorehabilitati on of minor 
injuries of the lumbosacral spine in athletes.  
Materials and methods.  The testing was carried out during 2013 -2023. 
The study involved 64 male and female athletes who are representatives of 
complex coordination sports (gymnastics, acrobatics li ke, rhythmic gymnastics, 
synchronized swimming) at the age of 10 to 18 years old with minor injuries in 
the lumbosacral spine. All recovered athletes were randomly divided into two 
subgroups, approximately equal in number, age and nature of the injuries 
sustained. Athletes of the first (control) subgroup received traditional 
rehabilitation treatment using physical therapy and underwater stretching. The 
second (experimental) subgroup of athletes was restored with the help of applied 
stretching training swimm ing. 
Results and their discussion. In the course of the study, it was confirmed 
that with prolonged (more than 45 minutes) swimming in warm water, deep 
tendon -muscle relaxation occurs, leading to compensation of tendon -muscle 
"Экономика и социум" № 2(105) 2023                        www.iupr.ru  353 
 contractures and vascular spas m, and normalization of microcirculation in 
tissues. With prolonged, more than 45 minutes, swimming in warm water and 
performing stretching exercises (sliding with a board, kolobashka), there is an 
increase in the intervertebral distance, decompression of the discs and spinal 
nerves, pain syndrome is stopped. We have developed special sets of exercises 
of applied swimming for stretching, which, like exercise therapy, carried out the 
formation of a muscular -ligament corset against the background of passive 
stretching of the spine (swimming on the chest and on the back with a board and 
/ or a bun in flippers or without them). In the course of the study, it was shown 
that long -term applied traction swimming in warm water combines the 
advantages of exercise ther apy and traction therapy (underwater traction). 
Recommended standard of appointments: 7 -10 sessions of 45 -90 minutes daily. 
Also effective conducting applied swimming 2 -3 times a week for 2 weeks. In 
the course of the performed study, a significant differe nce was noted in the 
quality of rehabilitation measures carried out in control and experimental 
subgroups (reduction of the time of complete recovery of athletes by 46%). It 
should be noted that the considered method of applied training swimming for 
stretc hing may have relative contraindications for cardiological and therapeutic 
diseases, which, as a rule, are absent in athletes.  
Conclusion. The long -term experience of rehabilitation activities carried 
out in the period from 2013 to 2023 has shown the high effectiveness of applied 
traction training swimming as a method of neurorehabilitation of athletes with 
minor injuries of the lumbar spine. The leading role in carrying out such 
recovery is played by a sports medicine doctor, who, in addition to 
rehabilita tion, must have the necessary knowledge in sports and applied 
swimming and in the theory of sports training. The load method of 
neurorehabilitation using applied stretching training swimming can be 
recommended to sports doctors of teams when planning and i mplementing 
rehabilitation measures with athletes who have minor injuries in the lumbar 
spine.  
References:  
1. Epifanov V.A. Therapeutic physical culture and sports medicine. 
M.:Medicine, 1999; 304.  
2. Epifanov V.A. Rehabilitation in traumatology. M.: GEOTARMedia, 2010; 
336. 
  
