Toddler drowning in domestic swimming pools
C Blum, J Shield
Abstract
Aims —T o identify how toddlers who
drowned gained access to private swim-ming pools; to recommend preventivestrategies to reduce the incidence of
toddler drowning and near drowning.Method— The study reviewed critically all
completed investigations into the drown-ing deaths of toddlers aged 1–4 yearsreported to the state coroner (n=33) as aresult of unintentional submersion inci-dents in domestic swimming pools in Vic-toria, Australia, from 1 January 1992 to 31December 1997.Results— There was a predominance of 1
year olds, and boys. Forty six per cent ofthe children drowned in the three summermonths. The majority of pools werein-ground; most were located on thechild’s home property. Over half the poolslacked fencing of any kind; of those thatdid have fences, only three appear to havemet Australian standards.Conclusions— More than half of the chil-
dren studied drowned in unfenced poolsand spas. In not one case did a child gainunaided access to a pool ﬁtted with a fullyfunctional gate and fence that met theAustralian standard. Where children
gained access to fenced pools, the majority
did so via faulty or inadequate gates, orthrough gates that were propped open.This ﬁnding highlights the need for pool
owners to install Australian standardapproved fences and gates, and to main-tain existing fences and gates regularly.Door locks and supervision were inad-equate primary prevention strategies.
(Injury Prevention 2000; 6:288–290)
Keywords: toddler drowning; drowning; swimming
pools; pool fencing
Drowning is the leading cause of unintentional
injury death in toddlers aged 1–3 years in everystate in Australia.
1In Victoria, an annual aver-
age of 10 children aged 0–14 years drown indomestic swimming pools and spas.
2Australian
and overseas studies have attempted to uncovereVective preventive measures, with many rec-
ommending uniform pool fencing legislation asthe principal preventive strategy.
1 3–5Four sided
fencing, isolating the pool from other buildingsor structures, is the preferred fencing type.
The Victorian State Government legislated
fencing for all domestic swimming pools
installed afterApril 1991. Further legislation in
1994 required the fencing of pools built before
April 1991. Owners were given three years tocomply with the retrospective legislation.
2
Although fencing, or securing access from the
house, is now mandatory for all pools in Victo-ria, little is known about how aggressively the
laws have been enforced. Non-complianceattracts a maximum penalty of $A500,
6yet
anecdotal evidence suggests that few prosecu-
tions have resulted. Four Australian standardsare available to assist with compliance.
7–10
Pool fencing alone may not have reduced
toddler drownings to the extent anticipated.11
In Queensland, after an initial large decline,toddler drownings have risen almost to pre-legislation levels. Possible explanations are thatthe extensive media coverage of the issue beforelegislation being enacted has not been sus-
tained, and compliance and enforcement areprobably low.
11
The aims of this critical review of a consecu-
tive case series were to identify how toddlers
who drowned gained access to private swim-ming pools, and to recommend preventivestrategies to maximise the e Vectiveness of pool
fencing in reducing the incidence of toddler
drowning and near drowning.
Method
Case records of all completed investigationsinto deaths of children aged 1–4 years reportedto the Victorian state coroner after drowning indomestic pools (including spas and wadingpools), between 1992 and 1997, were exam-
ined to determine the mode of entry of eachchild. Thirty cases were obtained from the Vic-torian Institute of Forensic Medicine, two fromthe Consultative Council on Obstetric andPaediatric Mortality and Morbidity (A Alt-mann, personal communication, 1998), andone from the coroner’s records. The few caseswhere the coroner’s ﬁndings were pendingwere not available for analysis.
Details of age and gender, type and location
of pool, fence characteristics, and the means bywhich the child gained access to the pool, wererecorded onto a database. One case withoutfull details was included in the analysis of age,sex and pool location, but excluded from all
other analysis.
Results
The ages of the 21 boys and 12 girls (a ratio of1.8:1) ranged from 1–4 years. Drowningsdecreased with increasing age. Forty six percent of children drowned during the threemonths of the southern hemisphere summer(December to February).
Nineteen drownings occurred in in-ground
pools, nine in above ground pools, and theremaining four in outdoor spas or wadingpools. The pool was much more likely to belocated on the child’s home property than at aproperty the child was visiting. Only one childdrowned in a neighbour’s pool as a result of“trespassing”.Injury Prevention 2000; 6:288–290 288
Royal Children’s
Hospital, FlemingtonRoad, Parkville,Victoria 3052,AustraliaC BlumJ Shield
Correspondence to:
Jan Shield(jan.shield@justice.vic.gov.au
www.injuryprevention.com
In 18 cases, the pool did not have complete
fencing, including one instance where the fence
was removed for renovation of the surroundingdeck. Of the 14 pools with some form of fenc-ing, only three appeared to have Standards
Australia approved fencing, nine had non-standard or faulty fences, and in two cases,fencing status was unclear.
In 11 of the 18 cases without fencing, the
child was known to be outside the houseimmediately before the drowning incident, andseven children were thought to be inside. Ofthese seven children, ﬁve left the house throughthe back door which was reported to be “usu-ally” locked, three of the doors were unlocked,
one was left unlocked by the child’s mother,
and in one case the child had opened a faultylock. One child left through a door known to beopen and one climbed through a window.
Eight of the 14 children who gained access to
fenced pools did so through inadequate orfaulty gates. One climbed over or crawledunder a non-standard fence, and three gainedaccess after gates had been propped open. Intwo cases where fence compliance was notnoted, the children were allowed into the poolarea by parents.
Parents used several control measures to
prevent their children gaining access to pools,including full or partial fencing, door locks,
verbal warnings, and supervision.
Twenty eight children were in the care of one
or both parents at the time of drowning. In 15cases supervision was temporarily interrupteddue to supervisors performing house oryardwork, answering the telephone, or partici-pating in a social activity. In three cases therewas confusion about who was supervising thechild, in three cases the supervisor was watch-ing television, and in 11 cases, supervision wasinterrupted in various ways.
Discussion
Only three of the 33 cases involved childrengaining access to fully fenced pools. The over-whelming majority of pools were unfenced or
inadequately fenced. Children who gainedaccess to fencing that complied with theAustralian standard were allowed into the poolarea by parents or gained access through gatesthat were propped open.
LIMITATIONS
Cases where the coroner’s ﬁndings were still
pending were not available for inclusion. Mostcoronial reports did not specify whether or notisolation fencing was required at the time thedrowning occurred; therefore, no inferences
regarding legislative compliance can be made.Most research in the ﬁeld comes fromAustralia, the United States, and the UnitedKingdom. Few countries other than Australiahave much published experience with swim-ming pool fencing legislation, thus limitinginternational comparisons.
The most common age range for drowning
in this series was 1–2 years. A New South Walesstudy also found this age group to be the most
common.
12These two age groups are likely to
be at greater risk due to high mobility and lack
of understanding of dangers.
The predominance of males is consistent
with the results of other studies,1 12–14perhaps
reﬂecting the natural di Verences in the devel-
opmental and exploratory characteristics of thegenders.
1
Although it is not surprising that more
drownings occurred in summer, it was unex-pected that so many drownings occurredoutside the summer months. This could be due
to relaxed vigilance outside the traditional
swimming season. Similar results in a Brisbanestudy led the authors to speculate that “on awintry day, however uninviting a cold pool maylook in adult eyes, to a toddler an exposedwater hazard may be fatally seductive”.
15
In common with other studies,51 5in-ground
pools were most commonly implicated in tod-
dler drownings, but little can be deduced fromthis ﬁnding without reliable data on thenumbers of each pool type in the community.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that in-groundpools are more numerous, and may also bemore accessible to toddlers.
Toddlers drowning in their home pools is
most likely due to increased exposure. How-ever the 11 drownings that occurred on otherproperties support the enactment of uniformfencing regulations. In one study 21% of poolowners without fencing attributed this to lackof need as they had no children, yet nearly two
thirds of these households had a young child
visit within the previous six months.
16Alto-
gether 57% of these owners also felt their
property fencing was adequate to keep a childaway from their pool.
16Notably, the one child
in this study who drowned while “trespassing”managed to negotiate two property fences anda pool fence.
Two children were considered to be compe-
tent swimmers, one having attended 20 swim-
ming lessons. Swimming lessons are not yetp r o v e nt ob ea ne Vective preventive measure
for children under 3 years of age.
17It is di Ycult
to replicate the adverse conditions in which anKey points
xYoung children, particularly boys, are at
great risk of drowning in swimming pools.
xWhere pools were fenced, children gainedaccess through faulty or inadequate gates,and gates that were propped open byadults.
xDoor locks and supervision are inad-equate primary prevention measures.
xContinuing media campaigns are needed
to reinforce safe behaviours.
xPool gates can be ﬁtted with double lock-ing devices.
xPool owners can be encouraged to learnCPR.
xGovernments can increase penalties fornon-compliance with legislation.
xCoroners can develop standard reportingformats.
xPreventive e Vorts must be rigorously
evaluated.T oddler drowning in domestic swimming pools 289
www.injuryprevention.com
immersion incident generally takes place, for
example, an unexpected immersion while fullyclothed.
4In one study, 10% of deceased
children had been able to swim at least 10metres.
18In such cases, parents may become
complacent and relax their supervision.
Children gaining access through gates with-
out locks, or with faulty locks, conﬁrm otherstudies identifying the gate as the principal
weakness in the pool fence.
11 21 6The fences in
the three drownings that occurred in pools that
appeared to be fully compliant were renderedine Vective by the actions of adults in propping
them open. A Brisbane study reported that 5%
of pool gates are propped open at any onetime.
19Owners should also be aware of the
importance of adequate maintenance of both
gate and fence.
Door and window locks as the only physical
barriers between child and hazard are unlikely
to be e Vective in preventing toddler drownings,
even when the locks themselves are childresistant. As door locks limit access to the out-doors, adults may leave them unlocked.
Implications for prevention
EDUCATION
Continuing media campaigns, reinforced by
voluntary standards to ensure the media andadvertising sectors depict fenced pools andspas, could assist in achieving greater compli-ance. Media campaigns can also encourage
pool owners to adopt safety behaviours, such asmaintaining fences, never propping gates open,removing obsolete pools, removing climbableobjects from the pool surrounds, and learningcardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) skills.Parents and carers can be encouraged to adopta policy of boycotting properties with unfencedpools, supervising children around pools irre-spective of fencing status, learning CPR, andunderstanding that “ﬂoaties” are not substi-
tutes for life vests.
Issues to be addressed through education
include unrealistic expectations that young
children can “swim”, that they understanddanger, and that they will obey instructions tokeep away from the pool.
ENGINEERING
Pool gates could be designed with double lock-
ing devices and ﬁtted with warning signs not toprop gates open. Some jurisdictions requireCPR instructions and emergency responsetelephone numbers to be ﬁtted to pool fences.
ENFORCEMENT
The state government could increase prosecu-tions and meaningful penalties for non-compliance. A requirement for CPR instruc-tions, emergency response telephone numbers,and warning signs about propping gates open,
to be ﬁtted to every pool fence, could be addedto the Australian standard. Local governmentscould register all pool owners, require annuallyupdated CPR certiﬁcates, o Ver inspection and
maintenance services, issue certiﬁcates of com-
pliance, and monitor compliance (buildingsurveyor, City of Moonee Valley, personalcommunication, 1998).
EVALUATION
The coroner could develop a standard report-
ing format for drowning fatalities to ensureuniform reporting, particularly details con-cerning the means of entry and compliancestatus. Investigation of every pool death should
be mandatory.
A follow up study to track changes since the
full implementation of mandatory fencing,particularly to monitor compliance, is neededto inform future preventive e Vorts. Meanwhile,
it is crucial that media publicity is sustaineduntil full compliance with legislation isachieved, and that education and mediacontinue to reinforce the message of whyfences are necessary.
The authors wish to acknowledge with grateful thanks the
assistance and support of Dr Neale Jackson, RMIT University;Simon Jolly, Vicki Winship and David Freeman, VictorianInstitute of Forensic Medicine & State Coroner’s O Yce; Dr
Anne Altmann, Consultative Council on Obstetric and Paediat-ric Mortality and Morbidity; Fran McFadzen and MarilynLyford of the Australian Injury Prevention Network.
1 Cass DT, Ross FI, Lam LT. Childhood drowning in New
South Wales 1990–1995: a population-based study. Med J
Aust 1996; 165:163–5.
2 Victorian Injury Surveillance System. Drownings and near-
drownings at home. Hazard 1990; 5:1–4.
3 Kemp A, Sibert JR. Drowning and near drowning in
children in the United Kingdom: lessons for prevention.BMJ 1992; 304:1143–6.
4 Pitt WR, Balanda KP. Childhood drowning and near
drowning in Brisbane: the contribution of domestic pools.Med J Aust 1991; 154:661–5.
5 Wintemute GJ, Wright MA. The attitude-practice gap
revisited: risk reduction beliefs and behaviors among own-ers of residential swimming pools. Pediatrics 1991; 88:1168–
71.
6 Building Control Commission . Silence: that’s all you hear
when a child drowns. Melbourne: Building Control Com-
mission, 1997.
7 Standards Australia. AS 1926.1–1993: Swimming pool safety,
Part 1: fencing for swimming pools. Homebush: Standards
Australia, 1993: 6–9.
8 Standards Australia. AS 1926.2–1995: Swimming pool safety,
Part 2: location of fencing for private swimming pools.Homebush: Standards Australia, 1995.
9 Standards Australia. AS 2818–1993: Guide to swimming pool
safety. Homebush: Standards Australia, 1993.
10 Standards Australia. AS 2820–1993: Gate units for private
swimming pools. Homebush: Standards Australia, 1993: 7.
11 Pitt WR, Balanda KP. Toddler drownings in domestic
swimming pools in Queensland since uniform fencingrequirements. Med J Aust 1998; 169:557–8.
12 Cass DT, Ross FI, Grattan-Smith TM. Child drownings: a
changing pattern. Med J Aust 1991; 154:163–5.
13 Brenner RA, Smith GS, Overpeck MD. Divergent trends in
childhood drowning rates, 1971 through 1988. JAMA
1994; 271:1606–8.
14 Riley MD, Larson A, Langford J. Drowning fatalities of
children in Tasmania: di Verences from national data. Aust
N Z J Public Health 1996; 20:547–9.
15 Pearn J, Nixon J. Swimming pool immersion accidents: an
analysis from the Brisbane drowning study. Inj Prev
1997; 3:307–9.
16 Balanda KP, Spinks D, Ring I, et al. The Brisbane home
safety survey and its role in the Queensland pool safetycampaign: domestic swimming pool fencing characteris-tics, compliance and attitudes. Health Promotion Journal of
Australia 1991; 1:37–42.
17 Asher KN, Rivara FP, Felix D, et al. Water safety training as
a potential means of reducing risk of young children’sdrowning. Inj Prev 1995; 1:228–33.
18 Nixon J, Pearn J, Oldenburg B, et al.Review of countermeas-
ures to reduce drowning, near-drowning and spinal injuries fromdiving into shallow water. Canberra: Commonwealth De-
partment of Human Services and Health, 1995: 20.
19 Pitt R. Fences save lives. The Bulletin 1992; March 3: 57.290 Blum, Shield
www.injuryprevention.com
