SHORT REPORT
Awareness of swimming pool suction injury among tour
operators
A Davison ,JWL Puntis
.............................................................................................................................
Arch Dis Child 2003; 88:584–586
A 6 year old girl suffered rectal prolapse after being
sucked onto a swimming pool drain from which the coverhad been removed. After six days in hospital she made afull recovery. The severe form of this injury may result inevisceration of small bowel, short bowel syndrome, andthe need for long term parenteral nutrition. A survey oftravel agents revealed a low awareness of this potentiallydevastating hazard, and a failure on the part of somecompanies to take adequate responsibility for customersafety. Preventive measures are reviewed.
While on holiday in the Greek islands a 6 year old girlwas sucked onto an uncovered drain as she climbedinto the communal swimming pool. The drain was
located on the second of the steps giving access to the waterand had not had its cover replaced after routine cleaning. Theforce of suction was strong enough to pull her onto the drainand hold her tight, creating a vacuum, until the power to thepump was interrupted. Unfortunately, because of languagedifﬁculties and not knowing how to isolate the power supply,the girl remained stuck to the drain for several minutes. Shebecame extremely distressed and when eventually freed, wasfound to have developed a mass about the size of an orangeprotruding from her anus. Urgent transfer to a medical facil-ity on the Greek mainland was arranged and there followed atwo and a half hour journey by hydrofoil to a major hospital.Here she underwent a computed tomography (CT) scan of thepelvis prior to manual reduction of the rectal prolapse undersedation. Five more days were spent recovering in hospital.
The pelvic CT scan showed a ﬂuid collection outside the
rectum, which at the time was thought likely to represent abowel perforation, but was later considered to be ﬂuid exuda-tion from traumatised tissues. At a hospital consultation in theUK several weeks later the girl was well, although still experi-encing some pain and discomfort on defaecation. The familyhad found the whole experience deeply upsetting, and hadbeen referred by their general practitioner for psychologicalsupport. There have been no long lasting physical sequelae.
SWIMMING/PADDLING POOL SUCTION INJURIES
The most severe form of this kind of injury leads to trans-analintestinal evisceration, of which there have been at least eightdocumented cases.
1The true incidence is unknown, with mild
cases going unreported. In each case there is a commonmechanism of injury.
2Circulation systems needed for water
ﬁltration are integral components of swimming pools and thedrain outlet is ﬁtted with a cover. However, if for some reasonthe cover has been removed and a child sits or is sucked ontoan unprotected drain, a seal is formed with the skin of theperineum and buttocks allowing a vacuum to be created by thepump. This can result in the generation of high pressures,capable of exerting a force of up to 800 psi
2on the rectal wall.This negative pressure is transmitted to the abdominal cavity,and in severe cases causes evisceration of the small bowelthrough a full thickness tear in the rectum. In this situation itis common for the small intestine to be avulsed from itsmesenteric attachments.
1–4In severe injury, stoma formation is
the rule and in six of the eight severe cases described, loss ofabsorptive small bowel surface area necessitated long termparenteral nutrition.
1The frequency of suction injuries in
swimming pools is thought to be increasing.3This is probably
a result of increased power of suction required to produce fea-tures such as artiﬁcial wave machines, inadequate pool secu-rity, and increased use of holiday pools in resorts where thereare insufﬁcient or inadequately trained staff. Our case lead usto explore how much the travel industry is aware of thispotentially devastating injury, and to review those measuresnecessary for prevention.
METHODS
A list of tour operators and their telephone numbers wasobtained from an up to date business directory in the city ref-erence library. Although around a quarter of numbers were nolonger in use, 42 UK companies providing holidays abroadwere successfully contacted via telephone and email. At theinitial telephone contact a request was made speciﬁcally totalk to a company representative responsible for swimmingpool safety. Questions from a structured interview (see box)were asked regarding knowledge of suction/entrapment inju-ries, in addition to enquiries about speciﬁc safety checks car-ried out, and the presence of lifeguards in facilities used byholidaymakers. All telephone interviews were conducted byAD.
RESULTS
One in four (26%) of the 42 travel companies declined or wereunable to comment on any of the issues raised, and anadditional 16% of respondents did not sell holidays thatincluded use of swimming pools. Representatives from 24companies with holidays including pool access did provide aresponse when questioned. Only a third of personnelinterviewed had some knowledge of suction injuries, andsometimes this amounted to no more than having heard of theproblem. No company routinely gave advice to clients regard-ing suction injuries or the need to look for uncovered drainsbefore entering a pool. This is despite the fact that over a third(37.5%) routinely provided written general safety guidelines,including for swimming, for customers booking a holiday.
Around two thirds (70.8%) of the companies whose clients
had use of pools and who were prepared to discuss safetyissues did not carry out any safety checks themselves, butregarded this as the responsibility of the hotel or apartmentowners. Seven of 24 companies did carry out their own safetychecks, and these included ensuring that drains were covered.In addition, two tested difﬁculty of removal of the covers andﬁve had knowledge of how to isolate the power supply in cases584
www.archdischild.com
of emergency. In four of these ﬁve instances, however, the iso-
lating switch was locked in the plant room and only one com-pany had emergency panic buttons installed at poolside thatcould be used to switch off the power. The same company alsoemployed a further safety reﬁnement in the form of an alarmthat was triggered if anything covered a drain for more than afew seconds. In no country where holidays were offered was ita legal requirement for lifeguards to be in attendance at pool-side. In fact, only 1 in 6 (16.7%) companies used lifeguardsand two stated that if pools were unattended children wereforbidden to swim. Only one company had lifeguards at alltheir pools, and all of these spoke English. Three of the othertour operators using lifeguards required them to be Englishspeakers.
DISCUSSION
Suction/entrapment in the swimming pool is a potentiallyserious problem that may have devastating long termconsequences. This study indicates a relatively low awarenessof the issues involved among those holiday ﬁrms who wereprepared to discuss customer safety, with only a small minor-ity setting a high standard in terms of prevention. Tour opera-tors may have a legal responsibility for their clients’wellbeing,
5but holidaymakers clearly cannot take safety for
granted. For example, a recent undercover survey by the Con-sumers Association reported that among 43 pools in Cyprusand Gran Canaria, 28 were condemned as dangerous, ﬁve wererated as poor, and only 10 passed inspection.
5
If this seems to be a poor reﬂection on the travel industry it
should be noted that the Federation of Tour Operators exists tobring about improvement in all areas affecting customers’holidays, including standards of safety, health, and hygieneoverseas.
6Membership is by invitation only, and any safety
checks regarded as desirable are left to the discretion of indi-vidual tour operators to implement. It is not a regulatory body,but does have a Safety Committee of industry professionalssupported by independent technical experts in such areas asﬁre safety and health. This organisation clearly has a role inpromoting swimming pool safety; 16 of the companiescontacted in our survey were members.
There are no general recommendations as to where pool
drains are sited, the type of covers that should be used, theamount of suction that can be created by ﬁltration units, orwhere the power cut-off switches for ﬁltration systems shouldbe situated. Design features, however, are important factors inaccident prevention. Standard drain covers let water in fromthe top to rush downwards; this creates a vortex spiral above.Good practice indicates that drains should be covered withantivortex grates. These are covers that have no opening onthe top, but instead water enters from the sides.
1Other ways of
promoting safety include ensuring that drain outlet covers canonly be removed using special tools, and that there is regularpool inspection and maintenance. If a child does get stuck ona drain, immediate relief of the negative pressure by breakingthe vacuum seal between the patient and drain is essential inorder to limit the extent of the injury. Because of the strongforces involved this can only be achieved by switching off thepower to the pump. Clearly those staff in attendance mustknow both how to turn the power supply off and have thenecessary access to achieve this. If there are no supervisingstaff, panic buttons and cut-off switches should be available atpoolside.
In the light of our review we feel the following points are
relevant to the prevention of suction injuries:
•Increased awareness of swimming pool dangers among
both the public and travel companies.
•Safety information to be included in general advicebooklets given to those booking holidays.
•Regular safety and maintenance checks on swimming poolsto be the responsibility of tour operators.
•Checks to include location of drains and type/condition ofdrain covers.
•Use of antivortex covers that are difﬁcult to remove.
•Filtration system power cut-off to be simple and accessible.
•Poolside panic buttons.
•Poolside attendants and supervision of swimmers.
•Dual drain systems in new pools (reduced suction force).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We would like to acknowledge Professor David Cottrell’s help with our
patient and her family, and for making the referral to the gastroenter-ology unit.
.....................
Authors’ affiliations
A Davison, J W L Puntis, Dept of Paediatrics and Child Health,
University of Leeds, The Children’s Centre, The General Infirmary at
Leeds, UK
Correspondence to: Dr J W L Puntis, Room 142, B Floor, Clarendon
Wing, The General Infirmary at Leeds, Belmont Grove, Leeds LS2 9NS,UK; john.puntis@leedsth.nhs.uk
Accepted 27 October 2002
REFERENCES
1Hultman CS , Morgan R. Transanal intestinal evisceration following
suction from an uncovered pool drain: case report. J Trauma
1994; 37:843–7.
2Cain WS , Howell CG, Ziegler MM, et al. Rectosigmoid perforation and
intestinal evisceration from transanal suction. J Pediatr Surg
1983; 18:10–13.
3Gomez-Juarez M , Casclaes P, Garcia-Olmo D, et al. Complete
evisceration of the small intestine through a perianal wound as a result of
suction at a wading pool. J Trauma 2001; 51:398–9.
4Centers for Disease Control . Suction-drain injury in a public wading
pool—North Carolina, 1991. JAMA 1992; 267:2868.
5Consumers’ Association . Swimming pool safety. Holiday Which?
Winter 2000:16–19.
6Federation of Tour Operators . www.fto.co.uk.Questions posed to company representatives
identified as being responsible for swimming poolsafety, following a description of suction entrapmentinjuries
(1) Have you any knowledge of this type of injury and did
you know it could arise as a result of an uncovered swim-ming pool drain ?
(2) Are safety checks carried out on pools in facilitiesabroad, and if so, by whom ?
(3) What safety checks does your company carry out ?
How often are these performed ?Are drain covers the focus
of specific checks ?
(4) Do the checks include identifying where drains are situ-ated ?
(5) Where is the power supply that would switch off filtra-tion pumps located ?Is there free access, or is it in a locked
plant room ?If so, where is a key kept ?
(6) Are there emergency panic buttons situated at thepoolside ?
(7) What information is given to holidaymakers regardingpool safety ?Is any mention made of suction injuries in
company literature ?
(8) Do the pools have lifeguards or pool attendants ?
(9) Is it a company requirement to employ English speak-ing lifeguards/attendants ?
(10) Are there any other topics relating to pool safety thatwe have not discussed that you feel are important ?Swimming pool suction injury 585
www.archdischild.com
..................COMMENTARY..................
The authors describe the case of a girl who was drawn onto an
open outlet of a swimming pool and subsequently had suctioninjuries to her bowel. They then interviewed 42 travel agentsabout their level of understanding relating to this type ofinjury and about swimming pool safety standards. Theauthors found that the level of awareness was poor anddiscussed ways in which it might be improved.
There is little easily accessible data for overseas accidents;
however, there are UK ﬁgures relating to home and leisureaccidents. The Department of Trade and Industry publishesWorking for a Safer World ; the latest edition is the 23rd annual
report of the Home and Leisure Surveillance system for theyear 1999. A total of 1164 children aged 0–14 years withswimming pool related injuries presented to the 18 hospitalswhich comprise the study group of A &E departments involved
in the data collection. From this data it was extrapolated thatthere were 21 692 children out of a total of 25 404 patientswho attended UK A &E departments owing to such injuries for
that year. This suggests that there are a large number ofswimming pool associated accidents in the UK, a countrywhere the regulation of safety standards is high.
The Consumer’s Association survey did ﬁnd a large number
of overseas swimming pools to be unsafe (reported athttp://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/597285.stm). It also found thaton average eight children drown every year in pools whileabroad.
The Federation of Tour Operators (FTO) has a voluntary
membership and is active in lobbying governments as well aslocal tourist authorities relating to safety standards. Theyproduce a health and safety handbook which is directedtowards informing tour operators and helping them toimprove the standards in the accommodation that they bookfor their clients.All English and Welsh tour operators are subject to the
Package Travel Regulation which was made law on 1 January
1993; this states that the tour operators are responsible for thesafety of their customers. The FTO point out that half of thepeople who go abroad do so independently of tour operators,hence safety cannot be guaranteed for all travellers.
The Association of British Travel Agents (ABTA) is the trade
association for tour operators and travel agents; not all of itsmembers are joined to the FTO, however. It has 800 touroperators and 6700 travel agency ofﬁces, being responsible forthe sale of 80% of UK sold holidays.
The authors chose 42 tour operators which, as can be seen,
is a small sample, and did not make it clear as to whom theyinterviewed. There may be a very different response fromquestioning an ofﬁce bound worker responsible for booking aholiday compared with a tour operator representative whose
job is to ensure the accommodation for their clients is safe. Thepoor response is, however, worrying and the key principles ofinjury prevention, namely education, legislation, and enforce-ment of safety standards need to be applied by both membersand non-members of FTO. The collection of data is vital inorder to affect change and to show that preventive strategiesare effective. This should be available for all to see and not beregarded as commercial information.
This paper raises an important concern about severe injury
arising from poor safety standards, and given the largenumber of patients in the UK with swimming pool relatedinjuries (and a largely unknown number from people goingabroad, albeit with a noticeable annual death toll among chil-dren), it stimulates thought about how to prevent injury, andso allow for a happy holiday to be had!
I K Maconochie
Dept of Paediatric A&E, St Mary’s Hospital, London W2 1NY, UK;
i.maconochie@ic.ac.uk586
www.archdischild.com
